Sold at $3 a jar
Over 50% repurchase it every month for life

1

I was able to go to 1,000 radio stations, television stations, publications around the country and
persuade them to run mail-order sales ads without paying them a dime in up-front
cash. Instead they kept 100% of the revenue from the first sale.
Every time that ten people bought, five of
those people bought again and again and again,
for life thereafter. Making us $185 a year, every
year thereafter.

2

start a new business that you can offer in your retail store that can offer something
to the existing traffic, can be unrelated to your core business
connect with newsletter owners that you have served and know your reputation.

3

Write letters for them to sign which articulate their experience with you.
Mail it out to their lists

Abraham Mind Shift Challenge
Study Notes

many ways of looking
at joint-venturing
and strategic alliances

4

Instead of paying for advertising,
approach list owners or high traffic locations/sites and work
a split on revenue for the ad placements

5

If you do daily deliveries, work a JV deal with another business that does daily deliveries and do
their deliveries on the way for a fee

6

Improve another businesses marketing and get
paid only percentage based on the added business volume.

7

Approach companies that send out paper billing and invoicing
to clients in large volumes and place an ad insert with an offer
in there and work a split

8

If you have an offer that is at a price point that is too high for some of your leads, partner with
a smaller scale service provider, and refer business to them for a revenue split.

9

If you are a home builder that specializes in first time home buyers,
and you pay around $15,000 to attract a new buyer, approach people
in apartments and offer them $5,000 cash if they agree to move out
into one of your homes.
Approach newsletter subscription businesses

10

Bundle the newsletters together at a low price for a 3-6 month term to the consumer
Ask for a 25% percent revenue split on any extended
subscriptions with each newsletter business.

11

If you have an insurance company, start an organization so you can
have a captive market (American Association of Retired People)

12

Gather a bunch of individuals together who are in
non-competitive business but are trying to reach
the same demographic, organize the event but ask
the others to pay for the advertising. Everyone gets
to speak and promote their offers during at the event.

13

Provide the staff and the programs if they let you sell CDs of those programs in the back
of the room at the end of the live seminar for a share of the profits.

14

Get someone who has authority to be the face of your product, to do your advertisements. To add star-power.

15. Instead of charging consulting fees, take a percentage of the increase in revenues or savings in expenses.
16.

Buy cheap internet traffic and media, start a lead generation business and get paid per lead generated.

17. Get books, content and information that is out of print but useful,
buy the rights, strip the content down into a manual and sell it as a report.
18. Create a product and approach a brand to put to their name on it
so you can mark it up and offer a split with the brand.
19. Approach manufactures of products and say “Test these designs against yours.
If they tremendously increase sales, give us 5%. If they don’t, don’t use it.
20. Post a 1-800 number on an ad that does not have one,
quantify the sales increase from the 1-800 number and
work a split on the profits generated from the 1-800 number
21. Find a business that does not have an efficient phone sales force, bring in your own
and work a split on the profits generated by your sales force.
22. find inventory that does not get exposure, work a deal with the owner,
to place in high traffic retail locations and work a 3-way split.
23. Find office buildings that that do yearly leases but have a hard time
getting leases, work a deal with them and open up suites, cubicles etc that
can be rented monthly or weekly.

