QUANTUM
PSYCHOLOGY

W H A T CRITICS SAY ABOUT
ROBERT ANTON WILSON
A SUPER-GENIUS.. .He has written everything I was afraid to write
Dr. John Lilly
One of the funniest, most incisive social critics around, and with a
positive bent, thank Goddess.
Riane Eisler, author of The Chalice and the Blade
A very funny man.. .readers with open minds will like his books.
Robin Robertson, Psychological Perspectives
Robert Anton Wilson is a dazzling barker hawking tickets to the most
thrilling tilt-a-whirls and daring loop-o-planes on the midway of higher
consciousness.
Tom Robbins, author of Even Cowgirls Get the Blues
STUPID
Andrea Antonoff
The man's either a genius or Jesus
SOUNDS (London)
A 21st Century Renaissance Man.. .funny, wise and optimistic...
DENVER POST
The world's greatest writer-philosopher.
IRISH TIMES (Dublin)
Hilarious.. .multi-dimensional.. .a laugh a paragraph.
LOS ANGELES TIMES
Ranting and raving.. .negativism...
Neal Wilgus
One of the most important writers working in English
today...courageous, compassionate, optimistic and original.
Elwyn Chamberling, author of Gates of Fire
Should win the Nobel Prize for INTELLIGENCE.
QUICKSILVER MESSENGER (Brighton, England)

Wilson managed to reverse every mental polarity in me, as if I had been
dragged through infinity. I was astounded and delighted.
Philip K. Dick, author of Blade Runner
One of the leading thinkers of the modern age.
Barbara Marx Hubbard, World Future Society
A male feminist.. .a simpering, pussy-whipped wimp.
Lou Rollins
SEXIST
Arlene Meyers
The most important philosopher of this century.. .scholarly, witty, hip
and hopeful.
Timothy Leary
What great physicist hides behind the mask of "Robert Anton Wilson?"
NEW SCIENTIST
Does for quantum mechanics what Durrell's Alexandria Quartet did for
Relativity, but Wilson is funnier.
John Gribbin, physicist
OBSCENE, blasphemous, subversive and very, very interesting.
Alan Watts
Erudite, witty and genuinely scary.
PUBLISHER'S WEEKLY
Deliberately annoying.
Jay Kinney
Misguided malicious fanaticism.
Robert Sheafer, Committee for Scientific Investigation of Claims
of the Paranormal
The man's glittering intelligence won't let you rest. With each new book,
I look forward to his wisdom, laced with his special brand of crazy
humor.
Alan Harrington, author of The Immortalist

OTHER BOOKS BY ROBERT ANTON WILSON
1972
1973
1973
1974
1975

Playboy's Book of Forbidden Words
*Sex, Drugs and Magick: A Journey Beyond Limits
The Sex Magicians
T h e Book of the Breast (now Tshtar Rising')
ILLUMINATUS! (with Robert Shea)
The Eye in the Pyramid
The Golden Apple
Leviathan
1977
*Cosmic Trigger I: Final Secret of the Illuminati
1978
*Neuropolitics (with T. Leary & G. Koopman)
1980
The Illuminati Papers
1980-1 The Schrodinger's Cat Trilogy
The Universe Next Door
The Trick Top Hat
The Homing Pigeon
1981
Masks of the Illuminati
1983
Right Where You Are Sitting Now
1983
T h e Earth Will Shake
1983
*Prometheus Rising
1985
T h e Widow's Son
1986
*The New Inquisition
1987
Natural Law or Don't Put a Rubber on Your Willy
1987
*Wilhelm Reich in Hell
1988
*Coincidance: A Head Test
1988
"Nature's God
1990
*Quantum Psychology
1990
"Cosmic Trigger II: Down to Earth
1991
Chaos and Beyond
1993
"Reality Is What You Can Get Away With
1995
"Cosmic Trigger III: My Life After Death
1997
T h e Walls Came Tumbling Down
1998
Everything Is Under Control
2002
T S O G : The Thing That Ate the Constitution
2003
T S O G : The CD
2004
T h e Tale of the Tribe
"Published by New Falcon Publications

QUANTUM
PSYCHOLOGY
How Brain Software Programs
You and Your World

Robert Anton
Wilson

N E W FALCON PUBLICATIONS
TEMPE, ARIZONA U . S . A .

Copyright © 1990 Robert Anton Wilson
All rights reserved. No part of this book, in part or in whole, may be
reproduced, transmitted, or utilized, in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publisher, except for brief quotations in critical articles, books
and reviews.
International Standard Book Number: 1-56184-071-8
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 92-63046

First Edition 1990
Second Printing 1993
Third Printing 1996
Fourth Printing 1999
Fifth Printing 2000
Sixth Printing 2002
Seventh Printing 2003
Eighth Printing 2004

Cover Art by S. Jason Black

The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of
the American National Standard for Permanence of Paper for Printed
Library Materials Z39.48-1984

Address all inquiries to:
NEW FALCON PUBLICATIONS

1739 East Broadway Road #1-277
Tempe, AZ 85282 U.S.A.
(or)
320 East Charleston Blvd. #204-286
Las Vegas, NV 89104 U.S.A.
website: http://www.newfalcon.com
email: info@newfalcon.com

to
Laura and John Caswell
Rise and look around you..."

OTHER TITLES FROM NEW FALCON PUBLICATIONS
Prometheus Rising
TSOG: The Thing That Ate the Constitution
By Robert Anton Wilson
Rebels & Devils
Edited by C.S. Hyatt; with William S. Burroughs, et. al.
Undoing Yourself With Energized Meditation
The Psychopath's Bible
By Christopher S. Hyatt, Ph.D.
PsyberMagick
The Chaos Magick CDs
By Peter J. Carroll
Prime Chaos
By Phil Hirte
The Lovecraft Lexicon
By Anthony Pearsall
Astrology, Aleister & Aeon
By Charles Kipp
Intelligence Agents
By Timothy Leary, Ph.D.
Zen Without Zen Masters
By Camden Benares
The Complete Golden Dawn System of Magic
The Golden Dawn Audio CDs
By Israel Regardie
Virus: The Alien Strain
By David Jay Brown
Monsters & Magical Sticks
By Steven Heller, Ph.D.
Changing Ourselves, Changing the World
By Gary Reiss, LCSW
Speak Out!
By Dawn Menken, Ph.D.
Labyrinth of Chaos
By Brian Wallace
Fuzzy Sets
By Constantin Negoita
Join My Cult!
By James Curcio
Karmic Facts & Fallacies
By Ina Marx
For the latest information about new titles, availability and pricing,
visit our website at http://www.newfalcon.com

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introductory Note
Fore-Words
Part One: How Do We Know What We Know,
If We Know Anything?

10
11

A Parable About a Parable
The Problem of "Deep Reality"
Husband/Wife & Wave/Particle Dualities
Our "Selves" & Our "Universes"
How Many Heads Do You Have?
The Flight From Reason & The Cult of Instruments
Strange Loops & the Infinite Regress
Part Two: Speaking About the Unspeakable

25
28
39
47
53
59
65

Quantum Logic
How George Carlin Made Legal History
Fussy Mutts & a City With Two Names
What Equals the Universe?
The Creation of Reality-Tunnels
E and E-Prime
Part Three: The Observer-Created Universe

75
80
85
88
91
97

The Farmer & The Thief
Psychosomatic Synergy
Moon of Ice
Taking the Mystery Out of "Miracles"
Part Four: Schroedinger's Cat and Einstein's Mouse

113
120
127
132

Multiple Selves & Information Systems
Multiple Universes
Star Makers?
Wigner's Friend, or Whodunit?

147
159
167
178

Part Five: The Non-Local Self
Hidden Variables & the Invisible World
Quantum Futurism
Trajectories—The Journal of Futurism & Heresy

187
196
203

Introductory Note
Each chapter in this book contains exercizes which will
help the readers comprehend and "internalize" (learn to
use) the principles of Quantum Psychology. Ideally, the
book should serve as a study manual for a group which
meets once a week to perform the exercizes and discuss the
daily-life implications of the lessons learned.
I also employ the "scatter" technique of Sufi writers.
Topics do not always appear in linear, "logical" order, but
in a non-linear psycho-logical order calculated to produce
new ways of thinking and perceiving. This technique also
intends to assist the process of "internalization".

Fore-Words
An Historical Glossary
It is dangerous to understand new things too quickly.
— Josiah Warren, True Civilization
Some parts of this book will seem "materialistic" to many
readers, and those who dislike science (and "understand"
new things very quickly) might even decide the whole
book has a Scientific Materialist or (they might even say)
"scientistic" bias. Curiously, other parts of the book will
seem "mystical" (or worse-than-mystical) to other readers
and these people might decide the book has an occult — or
even solipsistic — bias.
I make these gloomy predictions with great assurance,
based on experience. I have heard myself called a "materialist" and a "mystic" so often that I have become wearily
convinced that no matter how I change my style or "angle
of approach" from one book to the next, some people will
always read into my pages precisely the overstatements
and oversimplifications that I have most carefully avoided
uttering. This problem does not seem unique to me; something similar happens to every writer, to a greater or lesser
extent. Claude Shannon proved, in 1948, that "noise" gets
into every communication channel, however designed.
In electronics (telephone, radio, TV etc.) noise takes the
form of static or interference or crossed wires etc. This explains why you may hear, while looking at a football game
1

1 The Mathematical Theory of Communication, Claude Shannon,
University of Illinois Press, 1948.
li

12

Fore-Words

on TV, some woman interrupting a forward pass to tell her
grocer how many gallons of milk she wants that week.
In print, noise appears primarily as "typos" — words that
the printer left out, parts of sentences that land in the
wrong paragraph, author's corrections that get mis-read
and changed one error to a different error, etc. I have even
heard of a tender love story that ended, in the author's
text, "He kissed her under the silent stars," which startled
some readers when it appeared in print as "He kicked her
under the silent stars." (Another version of this Old
Author's Tale, more amusing but less believable, claims
the last line appeared as "He kicked her under the cellar
stairs.")
In one of my previous books, Prof. Mario Bunge appears
as Prof. Mario Munge, and I still don't know how that
happened, although I suspect I deserve as much blame as
the typesetter. I wrote the book in Dublin, Ireland, with an
article by Prof. Bunge right in front of me, but corrected
the galleys in Boulder, Colorado, in the middle of a lecture
tour, without the article for reference. The quotes from
Prof. Bunge appeared correctly in the book but his name
appeared as Munge. I hereby apologize to the Professor
(and devoutly hope that he will not appear as Munge
again when this paragraph gets published — a bit of typographical noise that would insult poor old Bunge one more
time and render this paragraph utterly confusing to the
reader...)
In conversation, noise can enter due to distraction, background sounds, speech impediments, foreign accents etc.
and a man saying "I just hate a pompous psychiatrist" may
seem, to listeners, to have said "I just ate a pompous
psychiatrist."
Semantic noise also seems to haunt every communication
system. A man may sincerely say "I love fish," and two
listeners may both hear him correctly, yet the two will
neurosemantically file this in their brains under opposite
categories. One will think the man loves to dine on fish,
and the other will think he loves to keep fish (in an
aquarium).

Quantum Psychology
Semantic noise can even create a rather convincing simulation of insanity, as Dr. Paul Watzlavick has demonstrated
in several books. Dr. Watzlavick, incidentally, got his first
inkling of this psychotomimetic function of semantic noise
when arriving at a mental hospital as a new staff member.
He reported to the office of the Chief Psychiatrist, where
he found a woman sitting at the desk in the outer office.
Dr. Watzlavick made the assumption he had found the
boss's secretary.
"I'm Watzlavick," he said, assuming the "secretary"
would know he had an appointment.
"I didn't say you were," she replied.
A bit taken aback, Dr. Watzlavick exclaimed, "But I am."
"Then why did you deny it?" she asked.
At this point, in Dr. Watzlavick's view of the situation,
the woman no longer seemed a secretary. He now classified her as a schizophrenic patient who had somehow
wandered into the staff offices. Naturally, he became very
careful in "dealing with" her.
His revised assumption seems logical, does it not? Only
poets and schizophrenics communicate in language that
defies rational analysis, and poets do not normally do so in
ordinary conversation, or with the above degree of opacity.
They also do it with a certain elegance, lacking in this case,
and usually with some kind of rhythm and sonority.
However, from the woman's point of view, Dr. Watzlavick himself had appeared as a schizophrenic patient. You
see, due to noise, she had heard a different conversation.
A strange man had approached and said, "I'm not
Slavic." Many paranoids begin a conversation with such
assertions, vitally important to them, but sounding a bit
strange to the rest of us.
"I didn't say you were," she replied, trying to soothe
him.
"But I am," he shot back, thereby graduating from
"paranoid" to "paranoid schizophrenic" in her judgment.
"Then why did you deny it?" She asked reasonably, and
became very careful in "dealing with" him.
Anybody who had experience conversing with schizophrenics will recognize how both parties in this conver-

ч

Fore-Words

sation felt. Dealing with poets never has quite this much
hassle.
The reader will notice, as we proceed, that this Commu­
nication Jam has more in common with many famous
political, religious and scientific debates than most of us
have ever guessed.
In an attempt to minimize semantic noise (knowing I
cannot eliminate it entirely) I offer here a kind of historical
glossary, which will not only explain some of the
"technical jargon" (from a variety of fields) used in this
book, but will also, I hope, illustrate that my viewpoint
does not belong on either side of the traditional (pre-quantum) debates that perpetually divide the academic world.
Existentialism dates back to Soren Kierkegaard, and, in
his case, represented (1) a rejection of the abstract terms
beloved by most Western philosophers (2) a preference for
defining words and concepts in relation to concrete indi­
viduals and their concrete choices in real-life situations (3) a
new and tricky way of defending Christianity against the
onslaughts of rationalists.
For instance, "Justice is the ideal adjustment of all
humans to the Will of G o d " contains the kind of abstrac­
tion that existentialists regard as glorified gobbledygook. It
seems to say something but if you try to judge an actual
case using only this as your yardstick you will find your­
self more baffled than enlightened. You need something a
bit more nitty-gritty. "Justice appears, approximately,
when a jury sincerely attempts to think without prejudice"
might pass muster with existentialist critics, but just
barely. "People use the word 'justice' to rationalize their
abuse of one another" would seem more plausible to
Nietzschean existentialists.
The link between Nietzsche and Kierkegaard remains a
bit of historical mystery. Nietzsche followed Kierkegaard
in time, but whether he ever read Kierkegaard seems
uncertain; the resemblance between the two may represent
pure coincidence. Nietzsche's existentialism (1) also
attacked the floating abstractions of traditional philosophy
and a great deal of what passes for "common sense" (e.g.,

Quantum Psychology

15

he rejected the terms "good", "evil", "the real world", and
even "the ego") (2) also preferred concrete analysis of reallife situations, but emphasized will where Kierkegaard had
emphasized choice, and (3) attacked Christianity, rather
than defending it.
Briefly — too briefly, and therefore somewhat inaccurately — when we decide on a course of action and
convince ourselves or others that we have "reasoned it all
out logically," existentialists grow suspicious. Kierkegaard
would insist that you made the choice on the basis of some
"blind faith" or other (faith in Christianity, faith in Popular
Science articles, faith in Marx...etc.) and Nietzsche would
say that you as a biological organism will a certain result
and have "rationalized" your biological drives. Long
before Godel's Proof in mathematics, existentialism recognized that we never "prove" any proposition completely but
always stop somewhere short of the infinite steps required
for a total logical "proof" of anything; e.g., the abyss of
infinity opens in attempting to prove "I have x dollars in
the bank" as soon as one questions the concept of "having"
something. (I think I "have" a working computer but I
may find I "have" a non-working computer at any
moment.)
"George Washington served two terms as President"
seems "proven" to the average person when a Standard
Reference Book "confirms" it; but this "proof" requires
faith in Standard References — a faith lacking in many
"revisionist" theories of history.
Sartre also rejected abstract logic, and emphasized choice,
but had a leaning toward Marxism and went further than
Kierkegaard or Nietzsche in criticizing terms without
concrete referents. For instance, in a famous (and typical)
passage, Sartre rejects the Freudian concept of "latent
homosexuality" on the grounds that we may call a man
homosexual if he performs homosexual acts but that we
abuse the language when we assume an unobservable
"essence of homosexuality" in those who do not perform
homosexual acts.
Because of his emphasis on choice, Sartre also denied
that we can call a man a homosexual (or a thief, or saint, or

16

Fore-Words

an antisemite etc.) except at a date. "Mary had a lesbian
affair last year," "John stole a candy bar on Tuesday,"
"Robin gave a coin to a beggar on three occasions,"
"Evelyn said something against Jewish landlords two
years ago" seem legitimate sentences according to Sartre,
but implying an "essence" to these people appears fictitious. Only after a man or woman has died, he claimed,
can we say definitely, "She was homosexual," "He was a
thief," "He was charitable," "She was an antisemite", etc.
While life and choice remain, Sartre holds, all humans lack
"essence" and can change suddenly. (Nietzsche, like
Buddha, went further and claimed that we lack "ego" —
i.e., one unchanging "essential" self.)
One summary of existentialist theory says "Existence
precedes essence." That means that we do not have an
inborn metaphysical "essence", or "ego", such as assumed
in most philosophy. We exist first and we perforce make
choices, and, trying to understand or describe our existential
choices, people attribute "essences" to us, but these "essences"
remain labels — mere words.
Nobody knows how to classify Max Stirner — a complex
thinker who has strange affinities with atheism, anarchism,
egotism, Zen Buddhism, amoralism, existentialism, and
even Ayn Rand's Objectivism. Stirner also disliked nonreferential abstractions (or "essences") and called them
"spooks", a term for which I have a perhaps inordinate
fondness. My use of this term does not indicate a wholehearted acceptance of Stirner's philosophy (or anti-philosophy), any more than my use of existential terms indicates
total agreement with Kierkegaard, Nietzsche or Sartre.
Edmund Husserl stands midway between existentialism
and phenomenology. Rejecting traditional philosophy as
utterly as the existentialists, Husserl went further and
1

2

1

Nor does an iron bar possess the "essence" of "hardness." It
merely seems hard to humans, but might seem comparatively
soft or pliable to a muscular 500-pound gorilla.
"Spooks" does not appear in Stirner's German, of course. We
actually owe this delightful term to Stirner's translator, Stephen
Byington.
2

Quantum Psychology

*7

rejected all concepts of "reality" except the experiential
(phenomenological). If I see a pink elephant, Husserl
would say, the pink elephant belongs to the field of human
experience as much as the careful measurements made by
a scientist in a laboratory (although it occupies a different
area of human experience and probably has less impor­
tance for humanity-in-general, unless I write a great poem
about it....)
Husserl also emphasized the creativity in every act of
perception (i.e., the brain's role as instant interpreter of
data, something also noted by Nietzsche) and thus has had
a strong influence on sociology and some branches of
psychology.
Jan Huizinga, a Dutch sociologist, studied the game
element in human behavior, and noted that we live by
game rules which often have never risen to the level of
conscious speech. In other words, we not only interpret
data as we receive it; we also, quickly and unconsciously,
"fit" the data to pre-existing axioms, or game-rules, of our
culture (or our sub-culture).
For instance:
A cop clubs a man on the street. Observer A sees Law
and Order performing their necessary function of restrain­
ing the violent with counter-violence. Observer В sees that
the cop has white skin and the man hit has black skin, and
draws somewhat different conclusions. Observer С arrived
earlier and noted that the man pointed a gun at the cop
before being clubbed. Observer D hears the cop saying
"Stay away from my wife" and has a fourth view of the
"meaning" of the situation. Etc.
Phenomenological sociology owes a great deal to
Husserl and Huizinga, and to Existentialism. Denying
abstract or Platonic "reality" (singular) the social scientists
of this school recognize only social realities (plural)
defined by human interactions and game-rules, and lim­
ited by the computational abilities of the human nervous
system.
Ethnomethodology, largely the creation of Dr. Charles
Garfinkle, combines the most radical theories of modern

i8

Fore-Words

anthropology and phenomenological sociology. Recognizing social realities (plural), which it calls emic realities,
ethnomethodology shows how every human perception,
including the perceptions of social scientists who think they can
study society "objectively", always contains the limits, the
defects and the unconscious prejudices of the emic reality
(or social game) of the observer.
Phenomenologists and ethnomethodologists sometimes
acknowledge an etic reality which is like unto the old-fashioned "objective reality" of traditional (pre-existentialist)
philosophy and the ancient superstitions which have by
now become "common sense". However, they point out
that we cannot say anything meaningful about etic reality,
because anything we can say has the structure of our emic
reality — our social game rules (especially our language
game) — built into it.
If you wish to deny this, please send me a complete
description of etic reality, without using words, mathematics, music or other forms of human symbolism. (Send it
express. I have wanted to see it for decades.)
Existentialism and phenomenology have not only influenced some social scientists but many artists and quite a
few social activists or radicals. Both, however, have had
bad repute among academic philosophers and their
influence on the physical sciences has not received much
acknowledgment. We shall now trace that influence.
Pragmatism has a family resemblance to existentialism
and phenomenology and arose out of the same social manifold. This philosophy, or method, derives chiefly from
William James — a man so complex that his books land in
the philosophy section of some bookstores and libraries,
the psychology section elsewhere, and sometimes even
appear in the religion section. Like existentialism, pragmatism rejects spooky abstractions and most of the vocabulary of traditional philosophy.
According to pragmatism, ideas have meaning only in
concrete human situations, "truth" as abstraction has no
meaning at all, and the best we can say of any theory

Quantum Psychology

19

consists of, "Well, this idea seems to work, at least for the
time being."
Instrumentalism a la John Dewey follows pragmatism in
general, but especially emphasizes that the validity or
utility of an idea — we have gotten rid of "truth", remember? — derives from the instruments used in testing the
idea, and will change as instruments improve.
Like the other theories discussed thus far, Instrumentalism has had more direct influence on social science (and
educational theory) than on physical science, although
vastly influenced by physical science.
Operationalism, created by Nobel physicist Percy W.
Bridgman, attempts to deal with the "common sense"
objections to Relativity and Quantum Mechanics, and
owes a great deal to pragmatism and instrumentalism.
Bridgman explicitly pointed out that "common sense"
derives unknowingly from some tenets of ancient philosophy and speculation — particularly Platonic Idealism and
Aristotelian "essentialism" — and that this philosophy
assumes many axioms that now appear either untrue or
unprovable.
Common sense, for instance, assumes that the statement
"The job was finished in five hours" can contain both
absolute truth and objectivity. Operationalism, however,
following Einstein (and pragmatism) insists that the only
meaningful statement about that measurement would read
" While I shared the same inertial system as the workers, my
watch indicated an interval of five hours from start to
finish of the job."
The contradictory statement, "The job took six hours"
then seems, not false, but equally true, if the observer took
the measurement from another inertial system. In that
case, it should read, "While observing the workers' inertial
system from my spaceship (another inertial system moving away
horn them), I observed that my watch showed an interval of
six hours from start to finish of the job."
Operationalism has had a major influence on the physical sciences, a lesser influence on some social sciences, and
appears largely unknown to, or rejected by, academic

20

Fore-Words

philosophers, artists, humanists etc. Oddly, many of these
people, who dislike operationalism as a "cold, scientific"
approach, have no similar objection to existentialism or
phenomenology.
This seems strange to me. I regard existentialism and
phenomenology as the application to human relations of
the same critical methods that operationalism applies to
the physical sciences.
The Copenhagen Interpretation of quantum physics,
created by Niels Bohr (another Nobel winner), says much
the same as operationalism, in even more radical language.
According to Bohr, "common sense" and traditional
philosophy both have failed to account for the data of
quantum mechanics (and of Relativity) and we need to
speak a new language to understand what physics has
discovered.
The new language suggested by Bohr eliminates the
same sort of abstractions attacked by existentialism and
tells us to define things in terms of human operations, just
like pragmatism and operationalism. Bohr admitted that
both the existentialist Kierkegaard and the pragmatist
James had influenced his thinking on these matters. (Most
scientists oddly remain ignorant of this "philosophic"
background of operationalism and just regard the operational approach as "common sense" — just as non-scientists regard Platonic and Aristotelian metaphysics as
"common sense".)
General Semantics, the product of Polish-American
engineer Alfred Korzybski, attempted to formulate a new
non-Aristotelian logic to remove the "essentalist" or
Aristotelian game-rules from our neurolinguistic reactions
(speech and thinking) and re-align our brain software with
the existentialist and phenomenological concepts of the
above systems and especially of quantum mechanics.
E-Prime (English without the word " i s " ) , created by
D. David Bourland, Jr., attempts to make the principles of
General Semantics more efficient and easier to apply. I owe
great debts to both Korzybski and Bourland.

Quantum Psychology

21

General Semantics has influenced recent psychology and
social science greatly but has had little effect on physical
sciences or education and virtually no effect on the problems it attempted to alleviate — i.e., the omnipresence of
unacknowledged bigotry and unconscious prejudice in
most human evaluations.
Transactional psychology, based largely on the pioneering research concerning human perception conducted at
Princeton University in the 1940s by Albert Ames, agrees
with all the above systems that we cannot know any
abstract "Truth" but only relative truths (small t, plural)
derived from our gambles as our brain makes models of the
ocean of new signals it receives every second.
Transactionalism also holds that we do not passively
receive data from the universe but actively "create" the
form in which we interpret the data as fast as we receive it.
In short, we do not re-act to information but experience
transactions with information.
Albert Camus in The Rebel refers to Karl Marx as a religious prophet "who, due to a historical misunderstanding,
lies in the unbelievers' section of an English cemetery."
I assert that, due to another historical misunderstanding,
operationalism and Copenhagenism have remained mostly
the "property" of physicists and others in the "hard
sciences", while existentialism and phenomenology have
gained acceptance mostly among literary humanists and
only slightly among social scientists. The viewpoint of this
book combines elements from both traditions, which I
think have more that unifies them than separates them.
I also assert a great unity between these traditions and
radical Buddhism, but I will allow that to emerge gradually in the course of my argument.
For now, I have said enough to counteract most of the
noise that might otherwise distort the messages I hope to
convey. This book does not endorse the Abstract Dogmas
of either Materialism or Mysticism; it tries to confine itself
to the nitty-gritty real-life contexts explored by existentialism, operationalism and the sciences that employ existentialist-opera tionalist methods.

PART ONE
How Do We Know What We Know,
If We Know Anything?
I do not pretend to tell what is absolutely true,
but what I think is true.
— Robert Ingersoll, The Liberty of Man, Woman and Child

You can see the above illustration two different ways. Can
you see it both ways at the same time, or can you only
change your mental focus rapidly and see it first one way
and then the other way, in alteration?
"I

detect

a

Ubangi

in

the

fuel

supply."

— W. C. Fields

ONE
A Parable About a Parable
A young American named Simon Moon, studying Zen in
the Zendo (Zen school) at the New Old Lompoc House in
Lompoc, California, made the mistake of reading Franz
Kafka's The Trial. This sinister novel, combined with Zen
training, proved too much for poor Simon. He became
obsessed, intellectually and emotionally, with the strange
parable about the door of the Law which Kafka inserts
near the end of his story. Simon found Kafka's fable so
disturbing, indeed, that it ruined his meditations, scattered
his wits, and distracted him from his study of the Sutras.
Somewhat condensed, Kafka's parable goes as follows:
A man comes to the door of the Law, seeking admittance.
The guard refuses to allow him to pass the door, but says
that if he waits long enough, maybe, someday in the
uncertain future, he might gain admittance. The man waits
and waits and grows older; he tries to bribe the guard,
who takes his money but still refuses to let him through
the door; the man sells all his possessions to get money to
offer more bribes, which the guard accepts — but still does
not allow him to enter. The guard always explains, on
taking each new bribe, "I only do this so that you will not
abandon hope entirely."
Eventually, the man becomes old and ill, and knows that
he will soon die. In his last few moments he summons the
energy to ask a question that has puzzled him over the
years. "I have been told," he says to the guard, "that the
Law exists for all. Why then does it happen that, in all the
years I have sat here waiting, nobody else has ever come to
the door of the Law?"
25

2

6

How Do We Know...

"This door," the guard says, "has been made only for
you. And now I am going to close it forever." And he
slams the door as the man dies.
The more Simon brooded on this allegory, or joke, or
puzzle, the more he felt that he could never understand
Zen until he first understood this strange tale. If the door
existed only for that man, why could he not enter? If the
builders posted a guard to keep the man out, why did they
also leave the door temptingly open? Why did the guard
close the previously open door, when the man had become
too old to attempt to rush past him and enter? Did the
Buddhist doctrine of dharma (law) have anything in
common with this parable?
Did the door of the Law represent the Byzantine bureaucracy that exists in virtually every modern government,
making the whole story a political satire, such as a minor
bureaucrat like Kafka might have devised in his subversive
off-duty hours? Or did the Law represent God, as some
commentators claim, and, in that case, did Kafka intend to
parody religion or to defend its divine Mystery obliquely?
Did the guard who took bribes but gave nothing but
empty hope in return represent the clergy, or the human
intellect in general, always feasting on shadows in the
absence of real Final Answers?
Eventually, near breakdown from sheer mental fatigue,
Simon went to his roshi (Zen teacher) and told Kafka's
story of the man who waited at the door of the Law — the
door that existed only for him but would not admit him,
and was closed when death would no longer allow him to
enter. "Please," Simon begged, "explain this Dark Parable
to me."
"I will explain it," the roshi said, "if you will follow me
into the meditation hall."
Simon followed the teacher to the door of the meditation
hall. When they got there, the teacher stepped inside
quickly, turned, and slammed the door in Simon's face.
At that moment, Simon experienced Awakening.

Quantum

Psychology

27

Exercizes
1. Let every member of the group try to explain or
interpret Kafka's parable and the Zen Master's response.
2. Observe whether a consensus emerges from this
discussion or each person finds a personal and unique
meaning.

TWO
The Problem of "Deep Reality"
According to Dr. Nick Herbert's excellent book, Quantum
Reality, the majority of physicists accept Niels Bohr's
"Cophenhagen Interpretation" of quantum mechanics.
(We will later examine the ideas of physicists who reject
Copenhagenism and have other views.) According to Dr.
Herbert, the Cophenhagen view means that "there is no
deep reality."
Since we will soon find reasons to avoid the "is" of
identity, and other forms of "is", let us reformulate that in
more operational language — language that does not
assume we can know what things metaphysically "are" or
"are not" (their invisible "essences") but only that we can
describe what we phenomenologically experience. The
Copenhagen Interpretation then means, not that there "is"
no "deep reality", but that scientific method can never
experimentally locate or demonstrate a "deep reality" that
explains all other relative (instrumental) "realities".
Dr. David Bohm, however, states it this way: "The
Copenhagen view denies that we can make statements
about actuality." This says something more than Dr.
Herbert's formulation, if you chew on it a bit.
Both Dr. Herbert and Dr. Bohm reject the Copenhagen
view. Dr. Herbert has even called Copenhagenism "the
Christian Science school of physics." Like Dr. Bohm, Dr.
Herbert — a good friend of mine — believes that physics
can make statements about actuality.
I agree. But I limit "actuality" to that which humans or
their instruments can detect, decode and transmit. "Deep
28

Quantum

Psychology

29

reality" lies in another area entirely — the area of
philosophy a n d / o r "speculation." Thus, Dr. Richard
Feynman said to Dr. Bohm of his recent book, Wholeness
and the Implicate Order, "Brilliant philosophy book — but
when are you going to write some physics again?"
I will defend Dr. Bohm (and Dr. Herbert) later. For the
present, actuality in this book means something that
humans can experience and "deep reality" means
something that we can only make noises about. Science,
like existentialism, deals with what humans can
experience, and "deep reality" belongs to the preexistential Platonic or Aristotelian philosophers.
We can only make noises about "deep reality" — we
cannot make meaningful (testable) statements about it —
because that which lies outside existential experience lies
outside the competence of human judgment. No scientific
board, no judge, no jury and no Church can prove anything
about "deep reality", or even disprove anything about it.
We cannot demonstrate that it has temperature or does not
have temperature, that it has mass or does not have mass,
that it includes one God or many Gods or no God, that it
smells red or that it sounds purple, etc. We can make
noises, to say that again, but we cannot produce nonverbal or phenomenological data to give meaning to our
noises.
This rejection of speech about "deep reality" parallels the
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, which in one form states
that we can never measure the momentum and velocity of
the same particle at the same time. It also parallels
Einstein's Relativity, which says we can never know the
true" length of a rod but only the various lengths —
rlural — measured by various instruments in various
mertial systems by observers who may share the same
inertial system with the rod or may measure it from the
perspective of another inertial system. (Just as we can
never know the "true" time interval between two events,
rut only the different times — plural — measured from
different inertial systems.) It also parallels the Ames
demonstrations in perception psychology, which showed
:hat ive do not perceive "reality" but receive signals from the

30

How Do We Know.

environment which we organize into guesses so fast that
we do not even observe ourselves guessing.
Such "axioms of impotence," as somebody once called
them, do not predict the future in the ordinary sense — we
know that the future can always surprise us. Limitations of
this sort in science merely mean that scientific method
cannot, by definition, answer certain questions. If you
want answers to those kinds of questions, you must go to a
theologian or occultist, and the answers you will get there
will not satisfy those who believe in other theologians or
occultists, or those who don't believe in such Oracles at all,
at all.
An elementary example: I can give a physicist, or a
chemist, a book of poems. After study, the scientist can
report back that the book weighs x kilograms, measures у
centimeters in thickness, has been printed with ink having
a certain chemical formula and bound with glue having
another chemical formula etc. But scientific study cannot
answer the question, "Are these good poems?" (Science in
fact cannot answer any questions with " i s " or " a r e " in
them, but not all scientists realize that yet.)
S o , then, the statement that we cannot find (or
demonstrate to others) one "deep reality" (singular) that
explains all the relative realities (plural) measured by our
instruments — and by our nervous system, the instrument that
"reads" (interprets) all other instruments — does not mean
the same as the statement "there is no deep reality." Our
inability to find one deep reality registers a demonstrable
fact about scientific method and human neurology, while
the statement "there 'is' no deep reality" offers a
metaphysical opinion about something we cannot test
scientifically or experience existentially.
In short, we can know what our instruments and brains
tell us (but we cannot know if our instruments and brains
have reported accurately until other researchers duplicate
our work...)
What our instruments and brains tell us consists of
relative "realities" or cross-sections of "realities". A
thermometer, for instance, does not measure length. A
yardstick does not measure temperature. A voltmeter tells

Quantum Psychology

31

us nothing about gas pressure. Etc. A poet does not
register the same spectrum as a banker. An Eskimo does
not perceive the same world as a New York cab driver. Etc.
The notion that we can find "one deep reality"
underlying all these relative instrumental/neurological
"realities" rests upon certain axioms about the universe,
and about the human mind, which seemed obvious to our
ancestors, but now seem either flatly untrue or — even
worse — "meaningless".
I had better explain "meaninglessness". To the scientists,
especially of the Cophenhagen persuasion, an idea seems
meaningless if we cannot, even in theory, imagine a way of
testing it. For instance, most scientists could classify as
"meaningless" the following three propositions:
1. The frammis goskit distims the blue doshes on round
Thursdays.
2. All living beings contain souls which cannot be seen
or measured.
3. God told me to tell you not to eat meat.
Try to imagine how one would prove, or disprove, these
statements on the level of experience or experiment. First,
you have to find goskits, blue doshes, souls and "God"
and then get them into the laboratory; then you have to
figure out how to measure them, or detect signals from
them, or somehow demonstrate that you at least have the
right goskits or the right "God", etc.
Stop and think about that. You will now, hopefully, see
why such propositions appear "meaningless" compared to
a statement like "Water boils at 45 degrees Fahrenheit at
sea level on this planet," which easily lends itself to testing
land refutation) or "I feel like shit," which probably
contains truth to the speaker but always remains
problematical (but not "meaningless") to the listeners, who
know the speaker has described a common human feeling,
but do not know whether he means what he says or has
some motive for deceiving them. "I feel like shit" may
function as what Dr. Eric Berne called a Wooden Leg
Game — the attempt to shirk responsibility by feigning
incapacity.

32

How Do We Know.

Let us consider other untestable ideas where we can at
least imagine a test, but at present lack the technology to
perform the test. ("I feel like shit" may fall into this
category.) Some refer to this equally enigmatic class of
propositions as "indeterminate" rather than purely
" m e a n i n g l e s s " . The following statements appear
indeterminate:
1. Barnard's star has one or more planets circling it.
2. Homer was actually two poets writing in
collaboration.
3. The first settlers of Ireland came from Africa.
We cannot "see" Barnard's star clearly enough to prove
or disprove the first assertion, but probably will "see" it
clearly enough to make a decision after the space telescope
goes into orbit. (From Earth we can see frequent occlusions
of Barnard's star which have led many astronomers to
suspect our view periodically gets blocked by orbiting
planets, but this deduction remains a guess as of the date I
write this.) People can argue about Homer forever, but
nobody will prove their case until some breakthrough in
technology occurs (e.g., computer analysis of word choices
may determine if a manuscript had one author or two, or
we might invent a time machine...) Some day archeology
may advance to the point of identifying the first
inhabitants of Ireland, but now we can only infer that
perhaps some came from Africa.
Thus, where Aristotelian logic assumes only the two
classes "true" and "false", post-Copenhagenist science
tends to assume four classes, although only Dr. Anatole
Rapoport has stated the matter this clearly — "true",
"false", "indeterminate" (not yet testable), and "meaningless" (forever untestable). Some logical positivists also
refer to "meaningless" statements as "abuse of language";
Nietzsche simply called them "swindles". Korzybski
described them as "noises", a term I've already borrowed.
Among the propositions about the universe which
underlie the "one deep reality" fallacy, one can mention
the concept of the universe as a static thing, where current
research seems to indicate that conceiving it as an active

Quantum

Psychology

33

process fits the data better. A static thing or block-like
entity can have one "deep reality" but a process has
changing trajectories, evolution, Bergsonian "flux" etc.
E.g., if primates had one "deep reality" or Aristotelian "essence"
we could not distinguish Shakespeare from a chimpanzee.
(Our inability to distinguish certain Fundamentalist
preachers from chimpanzees does not contradict this.)
"One deep reality" also implies the idea of the universe
as a simple two-decker affair made up of "appearances"
and one "underlying reality", like a mask with a face
behind it. Modern research, however, indicates an indefinite series of appearances on different levels of instrumental magnification and finds no one "substance" or "thing"
or "deep reality" that underlies all the different appearances reported by different classes of instruments. E.g.,
traditional philosophy and common sense assume that the
hero and the villain have different "essences", as in melodrama (the villain may wear the mask of virtue, but we
know he "is really" a villain); but modern science pictures
things in flux, and flux in things, so solid becomes gas and
gas becomes solid again, just as hero and villain become
blurred and ambiguous in modern literature or
Shakespeare.
One model, or reality-tunnel, never "wears a crown," so
to speak, and sits in royal splendor above all the others.
Each model has its own uses in its own appropriate area.
"A good poem" has no meaning in science, but has many,
many meanings for poetry-lovers — a different meaning,
in fact, for each reader...
In short, "one deep reality" seems, to this view, as
absurd as "one correct instrument," or the medieval "one
true religion"; and preferring, say, the wave model of
"matter" to the particle model seems as silly as claiming
the thermometer tells more of the truth than the
barometer.
Pauline Kael always hates the movies I love, but this
does not mean one of us has a defective "good film
detector." It merely means that we live in different emic
realities.

34

How Do We Know.

Perhaps we have gone a bit further than the strict operationalist would like. We have not only implied that the
"physical truth" does not possess more indwelling
"deepness" than the "chemical truth", or the "biological
truth", or even the "psychiatric truth", and that all these
emic realities have uses in their own fields, but we open the
possibility that "existential truth" or "phenomenological
truth" (the truths of experience) have as much "depth"
( a n d / o r "shallowness") as any organized scientific (or
philosophic) truths.
Thus, radical psychologists ask us: does not the "reality"
of schizophrenia or art remain "real" to those in
schizophrenic or artistic states, however senseless these
states appear to the non-schizophrenic or non-artistic?
Anthropologists even ask: do not the emic realities of other
cultures remain existentially real to those living in those
cultures, however bizarre they may seem to the Geriatric
White Male hierarchy that defines official "reality" in our
culture?
At the end of the 18th Century, science believed the sun
" i s " a burning rock. (Now we model it as a nuclear
furnace.) William Blake, the poet, denied that the sun
"really was" a rock and claimed it "was" a band of angels
singing, "Glory, Glory, Glory to the Lord God Almighty."
Phenomenology will only say that the scientific gloss
appears useful to science, at a date, and the poetic gloss
appears useful to poets, or to some poets. This point seems
perfectly clear if one conspicuously avoids the "is of identity," as I just did, but opens a debate that spirals downward to Chaos and Nonsense if one rewrites it as "the sun
is a rock, or a furnace, to science, but is also a band of
angels, to certain kinds of poets." Try debating that formulation for a while, and you'll understand why physicists
began to seem a bit mad when arguing "matter is waves
but it is also particles" (before Bohr taught them to say,
"We can model matter as waves or model it as particles, in
different contexts.")

Quantum

Psychology

35

It seems, then, from both operational and existential
viewpoints that "isness" statements have no meaning,
especially if they fall into such types as:
1. Physics is real; poetry is nonsense.
2. Psychology is not a true science.
3. There is only one reality, and my church (culture/
field of science/political Ideology etc.) knows all
about it.
4. People who disagree with this book really are a bunch
of jerks.
Nonetheless, it seems that, because the meaninglessness
of all "isness" statements has not been generally recognized, many physicists confuse themselves and their readers by saying "There is no deep reality" (or even worse,
"There is no such thing as reality." I have actually seen the
latter in print, by a distinguished physicist, but out of
mercy I won't mention his name.)
Quite similar to this confusion in quantum mechanics,
popularizers of Transactional psychology — and, even
more, popularizers of the Oriental philosophies that
resemble Transactional psychology — often tell us that
"Reality doesn't exist" or "You create your own reality."
These propositions cannot be proven, and cannot be
refuted either — a more serious objection to them than
their lack of proof, since science now recognizes that
irrefutable propositions have no operational or phenomenological "meaning".
Thus, "Whatever happens, however tragic and horrible it
seems to us, serves the greater good, or God wouldn't let it
happen" — a very popular idea, especially among those
who have endured terrible grief — may serve a therapeutic
function for those in great emotional pain, but also, alas, it
contains the classic trait of purely meaningless speech. No
possible evidence could refute it, since evidence falls into
the category of "how things seem to us," and the statement
refuses to address that category.
"You create your own reality" has the same irrefutable
and untestable character, and hence also fits the class of

36

How Do We Know...

meaningless speech, or Stirner's "spooks" (or Nietzsche's
"swindles" or Korzybski's "noises").
What the popularizers should say, if they aimed at
accuracy, would take a more limited and existential form.
You create your own model of reality, or you create your
own reality-tunnel (to borrow a phrase from the brilliant, if
much maligned, Dr. Timothy Leary), or (as they say in
sociology) you create your own gloss of the "realities" you
encounter. Each of these formulations refer to definite and
specific experiences in space-time, which easily confirm
themselves in both daily-life demonstration and in
controlled laboratory experiments on perception.
Our young/old woman in the drawing at the beginning
of Chapter One represents one easy daily-life illustration.
It requires a huge leap of metaphysics to proceed from
this, or from laboratory demonstrations of the creativity in
every act of perception, or from the paradoxes of quantum
mechanics, to the resonant (but meaningless) proclamation
that "you create your own reality."
So: the first point of resemblance between quantum
mechanics and brain software — the first step in creating
what I have dared to call Quantum Psychology — lies in
recognizing the fact that the study of both "matter" and
"mind" leads us to question normal notions of "reality".
The second point of resemblance lies in the fact that such
questioning can easily degenerate into sheer gibberish if
we do not watch our words very carefully. (And, I have
learned, even if we do watch our words very carefully,
some people will read carelessly and still take away a
message full of the gibberish we have tried to avoid.)
Consider the following two propositions:
1. My boss is a male chauvinist drunk, and this is
making me sick.
2. My secretary is an incompetent, whining bitch, and I
have no choice but to fire her.
Both of these represent mental processes occurring
thousands of times a day in modern business.
Both of them also appear as "abuse of language" or mere
"noise" according to the modern scientific attitude

Quantum

Psychology

37

presented in this book. If we imagine these sentences
spoken aloud by persons in therapy, different types of
psychologists would "handle" them in different fashions,
but Rational-Emotive Therapists, following Dr. Albert
Ellis, would force the patient to restate them in accord with
the same principles urged in this chapter.
In that case, the statements would emerge, translated out
of the Aristotelian into the existential, as:
1.1 perceive my boss as a male chauvinist drunk, and
right now I do not (or will not) perceive or remember
anything else about him, and framing my experience
this way, ignoring other factors, makes me feel
unwell.
2.1 perceive my secretary as an incompetent, whining
bitch, and right now I do not (or will not) perceive or
remember anything else about her, and framing my
experience this way, ignoring other factors, inclines
me to make the choice of firing her.
This reformulation may not solve all problems between
bosses and secretaries, but it moves the problems out of
the arena of medieval metaphysics into the territory where
people can meaningfully take responsibility for the choices they
make.

Exercizes
1. Let each member of the group classify each of the
following propositions as meaningful or meaningless.
A. I hauled the garbage out this morning.
B. God appeared to me this morning.
C. I saw a UFO this morning.
D. This table top measures two feet by four feet.
E. Space becomes curved in the vicinity of heavy
masses, such as stars.
F. Space does not become curved at all; light simply
bends in the vicinity of heavy masses, such as stars.
G. Defendants are innocent until the jury pronounces
them guilty.
H. The umpire's decision is binding.

38

How Do We Know..
I. "History is the march of God through the world."
(Hegel)
J. In the act of conception, the male and female each
contribute 23 chromosomes.
K. The devil made me do it.
L. My unconscious made me do it.
M. Conditioned reflexes made me do it.
N. A church is the house of God.
O. Anybody who criticizes the government is a traitor.
P. Abraham Lincoln served as President between 1960
and 1968.

2. Where disagreements arise, attempt to avoid conflict
(quarrel) and seek to understand why disagreements must
arise in judging some of these propositions.

THREE
Husband/Wife & Wave/Particle Dualities
By the way, I have no academic qualifications to write
about Quantum Mechanics at all, but this has not
prevented me from discussing the subject quite cheerfully
in four previous books.
Some readers may wonder where I get my chutzpah.
After all, most physicists claim that the principles of
Quantum Mechanics contain problems (or paradoxes) so
abstruse and recondite that it requires a college degree in
advanced mathematics to understand the subject at all. I
first began to doubt that notion after a novel of mine,
Schroedinger's Cat — the first of my books to deal entirely
with quantum logic — received a very favorable review in
New Scientist, by a physicist (John Gribbin) who claimed
that I must also have a degree in advanced physics to have
written the book. In fact, I do not have any degree in
physics. (All I had of physics at university consisted of
Newtonian mechanics, optics, light, electromagnetism and
a mere survey course on the ideas of Relativity and
Quantum Theory.)
If I seem to understand quantum logic fairly well, as
other physicists besides Dr. Gribbin have asserted, this
results from the fact that Transactional psychology, the
study of how the brain processes data — a field in which I
do hold some academic qualification — contains exactly
the same weirdness that has made the quantum universe
infamous. In fact, I might even say that the study of brain
science will prepare one for quantum theory better than the
study of classical physics would.
39

40

How Do We Know.

This may surprise many, including the physicists who
claim that quantum uncertainty only applies to the subatomic world and that in ordinary affairs "we still live in a
Newtonian universe." This book dares to disagree with
that accepted wisdom; I take exactly the opposite position.
My endeavor here will attempt to show that the celebrated
"problems" and "paradoxes" and the general philosophical enigmas of the quantum world appear also in daily
life.
For instance, the illustration at the beginning of Chapter
One — which you can see as a young woman or as an old
lady — demonstrates a fundamental discovery of perception psychology. This discovery appears in many different
formulations, in various books, but the simplest and most
general statement of it, I think, goes like this: perception does
not consist of passive reception of signals but of an active interpretation of signals. (Or: perception doesn't consist of
passive re-actions but of active, creative trans-actions.)
The same law appears, in quantum theory, in different
words, but most commonly physicists state it as "the
observer cannot be left out of the description of the
observation." (Dr. John A. Wheeler goes further and says
the observer "creates" the universe of observation.) I will
endeavor to show that the similarity of these principles
derives from a deeper similarity that unites quantum
mechanics and neuroscience with each other (and with
certain aspects of Oriental philosophy).
Similarly, close relatives of such quantum monsters as
Einstein's Mouse, Schroedinger's Cat and Wigner's Friend
1

1

Einstein's mouse refers to Einstein's argument that since,
according to quantum theory, the observer creates or partially
creates the observation, a mouse can remake the universe by
looking at it. Since this appears absurd, Einstein concluded that
quantum physics contains some huge undiscovered fallacy.
Schroedinger's Cat refers to Schroedinger's proof that a cat can
exist in a mathematical condition or eigenstate where calling it
dead and calling it alive both make sense and calling it both
dead and alive also makes sense. Wigner's Friend refers to
Wigner's addendum to Schroedinger, showing that even when

Quantum Psychology

4*

appear in any account of how you identify something
across the room as a sofa and not as a hippopotamus. I will
demonstrate and elucidate as we proceed. Meanwhile, at a
reference point at the beginning, consider this:
Physicists agree that we cannot find "absolute truth" in
the quantum realm but must remain satisfied with probabilities or "statistical truths". Transactional Psychology, the
psychology of perception, also says we cannot find absolute truth in its field of study (sense data) and recognizes
only probabilities or (some say frankly) "gambles". The
physicist states that in many cases we cannot meaningfully
call Schroedinger's cat "a dead cat" but only "probably
dead" and the Transactional psychologist says that in
many cases we cannot call the Thing in the Corner a chair
but "probably a chair." The simple either/or judgment —
"dead" or "alive," "a chair" or "not a chair" — has
become, not the only case in logic, but the extreme or limiting case, and some say only a theoretical case.
(If you feel confused, don't worry. We will examine these
problems in greater detail later, and you will feel more
confused.)
In short, when modern neuroscience describes how our
brains actually operate it perforce invokes the same sort of
paradoxes a n d / o r the same statistical or multi-valued
logic that we find in the quantum realm. Thus I dare to
write about a field not my own because, in many
discussions with quantum physicists, I have found the
subject entirely isomorphic to my own specialty, the study
of how perceptions and ideas get into our brains.
To the Transactional psychologist, quantum mechanics
has the same fascination (and the same resemblance to
brain science) as cryptozoology, lepufology and Disinformation Systems, and all these fields, the scientifically sober
and the disreputably weird, bear a distinct family resemblance to each other.

the cat has become definitely alive or definitely dead for one
physicist, it remains both dead and alive for another physicist
located elsewhere (e.g., outside the laboratory.)

42

How Do We Know..

Perhaps I had better explain that. Cryptozoology deals
with (a) animals whose existence remains neither proven
nor disproven (e.g., the giant serpents allegedly dwelling
in Loch Ness, Lake Champlain etc.; Bigfoot; the Abominable Snowman of the Himalayas etc.) and (b) animals
reported in places where we don't expect them (the
mountain lion of Surrey, England, the kangaroos of
Chicago, the alligators in New York's sewers etc.) Those
who "know" how to judge such data have not kept up
with neuroscience; those who know the most about
neuroscience display the greatest agnosticism about these
critters and also have the greatest unwillingness to judge
them.
Lepufology concerns UFO sightings in which rabbits
play a significant — and usually highly puzzling — role.
(Some sample cases in both cryptozoology and lepufology
appear in my book, The New Inquisition, Falcon Press,
1987.) Again, those who "know" that lepufology cannot
yield useful data usually do not know neuroscience at all,
at all. Cases in which farmers claim that UFOs stole their
rabbits make an ideal arena in which to test Transactional
Quantum Psychology against the premature certitudes of
Dogmatic Believers and Dogmatic Deniers.
Disinformation Systems consist of elaborate deceptions,
constructed by intelligence agencies like the C.I.A., K.G.B.
or England's M.I.5, in which a cover story, when created,
has within it a second deception, disguised to look like
"the hidden truth" to any suspicious rival who successfully
digs below the surface. Since Disinformation Systems have
multiplied like bacteria in our increasingly clandestine
world, any perception psychologist who looks into
modern politics will recognize that quantum logic, probability theory and strong doses of zeteticism make the best
tools to employ in estimating if the President has just told
us another whooping big lie or has just uttered the truth
for once.
After all, even those who create Disinformation Systems
have themselves swallowed Disinformation Systems
devised by their rivals. As Henry Kissinger once said,

Quantum Psychology

43

"Anybody in Washington who isn't paranoid must be
crazy."
In dealing with cryptozoology, lepufology, Disinformation Systems and Quantum Mechanics one eventually feels
that one has come close to total nonsense, a basic defect in
the human mind (or the Universe?) or some mental fugue
similar to schizophrenia or solipsism. However, as our
opening drawing showed and we will see again and again,
the ordinary perceptions of ordinary people contain just as
much "weirdness" and mystery as all these Occult Sciences
put together.
Thus I will try to show that the laws of the sub-atomic
world and the laws of the human "mind" (or nervous
system) parallel each other precisely, exquisitely, and
elegantly, down to minute details. The student of human
perception, and of how inference derives from perception,
will find no shocks in the allegedly mind-boggling area of
quantum theory. We live amid quantum uncertainty all
our lives, but we usually manage to ignore this; the Transactional psychologist has found herself or himself forced to
confront it squarely.
This parallelism between physics and psychology should
occasion no great surprise. The human nervous system,
after all — the "mind" in pre-scientific language — created
modern science, including physics and quantum mathematics. One should expect to find the genius, and the defects, of
the human mind in its creations, as one always finds the
autobiography of the artist in the art-work.
Consider this simple parallelism: a husband and wife
come to a marriage counselor seeking help. He tells one
story about their problems. She tells quite a different story.
The counselor, if well-trained and sophisticated, does not
believe either party completely. Elsewhere in the same city,
two physics students repeat two famous experiments. The
first experiment seems to indicate that light travels in
waves. The second seems to indicate that light travels in
discrete particles. The students, if well-trained and sophisticated, do not believe either result. The psychologist, you
see, knows that each nervous system creates its own model
of the world, and the physics students of today know that

44

How Do We Know.

each instrument also creates its own model of the world.
Both in psychology and in physics we have outgrown
medieval Aristotelian notions of "objective reality" and
entered a non-Aristotelian realm, although in both fields
we still remain unsure (and quick to quarrel with each
other) about what new paradigm will replace the Aristotelian true/false paradigm of past centuries.
Claude Shannon's famous equation for the information
content of a message, H, reads
H - -Xpi logep,
The reader terrorized by mathematics (persuaded by
incompetent teachers that "I can't understand that stuff")
need not panic. £ merely means "the sum of." The symbol,
Pi, tells us what we will summarize, namely the various
probabilities Ipi, p2-..etc. to pn, where n equals the
number of signals in the message) that we can predict in
лагапсе what will come next. The logarithmic function
merely shows that this relationship does not accumulate
addinvely but logarithmically. Notice the minus sign. The
inlormarion in a message equals the negative of the proba­
bilities that you can predict what will come next every step
of the way. The easier you can predict a message, the less
information the message contains.
Norbert Weiner once simplified the meaning of this
equation by saying that great poetry contains more infor­
mation than political speeches. You never know what will
come next in a truly creative poem, but in a George Bush
speech you not only know what will come next, you prob­
ably could predict the whole speech, in general, before he
even opened his mouth.
An Orson Welles film has more information than an
ordinary film because Orson never directed a scene quite
the way any other director would do it.
Since information increases logarithmically, not additively, the rate of information flow has steadily increased
>ince the dawn of history. To quote some statistics from
the French economist George Anderla (rather familiar, by
now, to readers of my books) information doubled in the
1500 years between Jesus and Leonardo, doubled again in

Quantum Psychology

45

the 250 years from Leonardo to Bach's death, doubled
again by the opening of our century, etc. and doubled in
the seven years between 1967 and 1973. Dr. Jacques Vallee
recently estimated that information currently doubles
every 18 months.
Obviously, the faster we process information, the more
rich and complex our models or glosses — our realitytunnels — will become.
Resistance to new information, however, has a strong
neurological foundation in all animals, as indicated by
studies of imprinting and conditioning. Most animals,
including most domesticated primates (humans) show a
truly staggering ability to "ignore" certain kinds of information — that which does not "fit" their imprinted/conditioned reality-tunnel. We generally call this "conservatism" or "stupidity", but it appears in all parts of the
political spectrum, and in learned societies as well as in the
Ku Klux Klan.
To the Transactional psychologist, then, and even more
to the Quantum Psychologist, something as absurd as
lepufology contains many clues to how humans will, and
will not, process new information.
For instance in Flying Saucer Review, November 1978,
p. 17, one finds a report of a UFO which stole all the
rabbits from a farmer's hutch..
True or false or whatever, this report contains high
information, because most of us have not heard of UFOs
stealing rabbits. The signal has high unpredictability.
UFO Phenomena and B.S. edited by Haines p. 83: a close
encounter in which the UFO "pilot" looked like a giant
rabbit.
The information content has quantum jumped. Two
UFO/rabbit stories?
But the Mutual Easter Bunny Observation Network,
MEBON (a splinter off the less bizarre Mutual UFO
Network, or MUFON) has dozens of these stories in their
files. (They also have, as you might guess, a weird sense of
humor.)
Take this as delightful whimsy or sinister nonsense, file
it as you will according to your own reality-tunnel, but —

FOUR
Our "Selves" & Our "Universes"
To state our major thesis again in different words,
Uncertainty, Indeterminacy and Relativity appear in
modern science for the same reason they appear in modern
logic, modern art, modern literature, modern philosophy
and even modern theology. In this century, the human
nervous system has discovered its own creativity, and its own
limitations.
In Logic, for instance, we now recognize not only
"meaningless" propositions but also "Strange Loops"
(systems containing concealed self-contradiction) both of
which can infest any logical system, like a virus invading a
computer — but these logical "bugs" have often lingered
for centuries before being discovered.
People have murdered each other, in massive wars and
guerrilla actions, for many centuries, and still murder each other
in the present, over Ideologies and Religions which, stated as
propositions, appear neither true nor false to modern logicians —
meaningless propositions
that look meaningful
to the
linguistically naive. (For instance, much of this book will
attempt to show that every sentence containing the
innocent-looking word "is" also contains a hidden fallacy.
This will come as a distinct shock, or will seem like Crazy
Heresy, to those Americans currently battling in rival
"demonstrations" and acts of civil disobedience over the
question of whether a fetus — or even a zygote — "is" or
"is not" a human being.)
Meanwhile, in Art, Picasso and his successors have
shown us that a work of, say, sculpture can move us
47

48

How Do We Know..

deeply even if it has opposite meanings like our two-face
drawing. One Picasso classic moves me, for instance, even
though I can see it either as the head of a bull or the seat
and handlebars of a bicycle.
Joyce's Ulysses mutated the novel by describing one ordinary day, not as an "objective reality" in the Aristotelian
sense but as a labyrinth in which nearly a hundred narrators (or "narrative voices") all report different versions of
what happened. Different reality-tunnels.
Modern philosophy and modern theology have arrived
at such resonant conclusions as "There are no facts, only
interpretations" (Nietzsche) or "There is no God and Mary
is His mother" (Santayana) or even "God is a symbol of
God." (Tillich)
All this results from our new awareness of our "selves"
as the co-authors of our "universes". As Dr. Roger Jones
says in Physics as Metaphor, "whatever it is we are describing, the human mind cannot be parted from it." Whatever
we look at, we must see, first and foremost, our own
"mental filing cabinet" — the structure of the software
which our brain uses to process and classify impressions.
By "software" I mean to include our language, our linguistic
habits, and our over-all tribal or cultural world-view — our
game-rules or unconscious prejudices — the tacit realitytunnel which itself consists of linguistic constructs and
other symbols.
In daily life, the software of most readers of this book
consists of Indo-European language categories and IndoEuropean grammar. In advanced science, the software
includes both of these and also the categories and structures of mathematics, but in either kitchen-sink problems
or nuclear reactor problems we "see" through a symbolic
or semantic grid, since math, like language, functions as a
code which imposes its own structure on the data it describes.
The painter "thinks" (when painting) in form and color,
the musician in sound frequencies, etc. but most human
mentation employs words most of the time, and even
specialists like the mathematician, painter, musician etc.
use words for a large part of their thinking.

Quantum Psychology

49

Whatever we know, or think we know, about our
"selves" and our "universes", we cannot communicate
about either inner or outer realms without using language
or symbolism — brain software. To understand this book,
the reader must remind herself (or himself) again and
again, that even in thinking, and even in special areas like
math and art, we use some kind of symbols to "talk to
ourselves" or visualize.
The only "thing" (or process) precisely equal to the universe
remains the universe itself. Every description, or model, or
theory, or art-work, or map, or reality-tunnel, or gloss, etc.
remains somewhat smaller than the universe and hence
includes less than the universe.
What is left in our sensory continuum when we are
neither talking nor thinking remains non-symbolic, nonverbal, non-mathematical — ineffable, as the mystics say.
One can speak poetically of that non-verbal mode of
apprehension as Chaos, like Nietzsche, or the Void, like
Buddha; but "Chaos" and "the Void" remain only words
and the experience itself stubbornly remains non-verbal.
At that point one can only correctly say, with Wittgenstein in his Tractatus Logico Philosphicus: "Whereof one
cannot speak, thereof one must remain silent." Zen
Masters merely point or wave their staff in the air.
When we leave the nonverbal, when we again talk or
think, we perforce make symbolic maps or models, which
cannot, by definition, equal in all respects the space-time
events that they represent. This seems so obvious that we
all paradoxically never think about it and hence tend to
forget it. Nonetheless, a menu does not taste like a meal, a
map of New York does not smell like New York (thank
God), and a painting of a ship in stormy waters does not
contain the captain and crew who have to deal with real
ships in real storms.
All kinds of maps or models also show, on examination,
the personality or "mental furniture" of their creator, and,
to a lesser extent, of the creator's society and linguistic
system(s) — the semantic environment.
An experienced sailor will quickly spot the difference
between a painting of a ship by somebody who has also

How Do We Know.

50

worked as a sailor and a very similar painting by somebody who has only read about sailing.
Many a novel or play written in 1930, which seemed
"brutally realistic" then, now seems a little quaint and
"unreal" in places, because we no longer live in the
semantic environment of 60 years ago. Joyce's Ulysses
escaped this trap by not having a point of view at all, at
all — his multiple narrator technique gives multiple points
of view — just as post-Copenhagen physicists escape it by
what they call "model agnosticism", not accepting any one
model as equal to the whole universe.
Consider a map that tries to show, not "all" the universe,
but something less ambitious — all of Dublin, Ireland.
Obviously, the map would have to occupy the same
amount of space as Dublin. It would also have to include
about a trillion moving parts at least — one and half
million humans, an equal number of rats, a few million
mice, perhaps billions of bugs, hundreds of billions of
microbes, etc.
To tell "all" about Dublin this map would have to let its
moving parts go on moving for at least 2000 years, since a
town (not always called Dublin) has stood on the river
Anna Liffey for about that long.
This map would still not tell "all" about Dublin, even up
to this date (excluding the future...) until it somehow
included all the thoughts and feelings of the human and
other inhabitants of that area...
At this point, the map would still prove mostly useless
and largely irrelevant to a geologist, who wants to know
the chemistry and evolution of the rock and soil on which
Dublin stands.
So much for the "external" world. What kind of map
would ever approximate toward telling "all" about you?

Exercizes
1. Let a sexual partner team (husband/wife or two
lovers) re-enact their most recent quarrel. (If nobody will
admit that they "quarrel", let the chosen subjects re-enact
their most recent disagreement.)

Quantum Psychology

5i

2. Let this couple then reverse roles and let each one
"play" the other in a continuation of the disagreement.
Attempt to employ the technique of Method Acting: let
each player try to feel the point of view of the other while
acting the other.
3. See if you have two people in the group with opposed
views on some "hot" issue (e.g., abortion, gun control, the
war on drugs, etc.) Let them each attempt, by Method
Acting, to present the point of view of the other, as
sincerely as possible.
4. Let one member of the group acquire the following
thirteen items:
a toy fire-truck;
a Barbie doll;
a reproduction of a Picasso painting,
a brick;
a screw-driver;
a hammer;
a turkey feather;
a piece of balsa wood;
a rubber ball;
a piece of hard wood, such as birch;
a "ghetto blaster" (portable stereo);
a pornographic novel;
a philosophical treatise by Bishop George Berkeley.
Place these items on the floor and let everybody sit
around them. First, divide them into two groups — red
things and not-red things. See how many times ambiguous
cases arise (e.g., should a book with a red-and-white cover
go in the red pile or the not-red pile?)
Let the 13 items be divided into another two groups —
useful objects and toys. See how many ambiguities arise.
(Does art belong among toys? Does pornography?)
Each week, as long as the group continues, let somebody
think of another dualism and divide the 13 items into two
piles according to that new dichotomy.
Note each case where two things fall into different groups
according to one dualist system fall into the same group accord-

52

How Do We Know.

ing to another dualist system. (E.g., balsa wood and hard
wood will fall into the same group if one divides "wooden
things" from "non-wooden things," but will fall into
different groups if one divides "things that float" from
"things that do no not float.")
Note how the Aristotelian argument "It 'is' either an A or a
not-A" appears after you have found several things that belong
on the same side of one dualism but on opposite sides of other
dualisms.
Some suggestions for other dualisms: "educational
things" and "entertaining things," "scientific things" and
"non-scientific things," "good things" and "bad things,"
"organic things" and "inorganic things."
See how many odd and imaginative dualisms the group
can create.
At this point, an obvious fact seems worthy of special
emphasis. Actually doing these exercizes in a group, as
suggested, teaches much more than merely reading about them.

FIVE
How Many Heads Do You Have?
Borrowing a joke (or a profundity?) from Bertrand
Russell's Our Knowledge of the External World, I will now
demonstrate that the reader has two heads.
According to common sense, and the consensus of most
(Occidental) philosophers, we exist "inside" an "objective
universe", or — to say it otherwise — the "objective
universe" exists "outside" us.
Very few people have ever doubted this. Those who
have doubted it have arrived, inevitably, at highly eccentric conclusions.
Well, then, avoiding eccentricity and accepting the
conventional view, how do we know anything about that
"external universe"? How do we perceive it?
(For convenience, I will consider only the sense of sight
in what follows. The reader, can check for himself, or
herself, that the same logic applies if one changes the terms
and substitutes hearing or any of our other senses.)
We see objects in the "external universe" through our
eyes and then make pictures — models — of them in our
brains. The brain "interprets" what the eyes transmit as
energy signals. (For now, we will ignore the data that
shows that the brain makes a gamble that it can interpret
these signals.)
Again, very few Occidentals have doubted this, and
those who have doubted it all arrived at strange and
incredible alternatives.
So, then, we live "inside" an "external universe" and
make a picture or model of it "inside" our brains, by
53

54

How Do We Know..

adding together, or synthesizing, and interpreting, our
pictures or models of parts of the universe called "objects".
Then, it follows that we never know the "external
universe" and its "objects" at all. We know the model of the
"external universe" inside our brains, which exist inside our
heads.
In that case, everything we see, which we think of as
existing externally, actually exists internally, inside our
heads.
But we have not arrived at solipsism, remember. We still
assume the "external universe" from which we started. We
have merely discovered that we cannot see it or know it.
We see a model of it inside our heads, and in daily life
forget this and act as if the model exists outside our
heads — i.e., as if (1) the model and the universe occupy
the same area of space (as our map that tries to show "all"
about Dublin would occupy the same space as Dublin) and
(2) that this space exists "outside".
But the model and the universe do not occupy the same
space and the space where the model exists can only be
located "inside" our brains, which exist inside our heads.
We now realize that, while the universe exists outside,
the model exists inside, and therefore occupies much,
much less space than the universe.
The "real universe" then exists "outside" but remains
unexperienced, perhaps unknown. That which we do
experience and know (or think we know) exists in local
networks of electrochemical bonds in our brains.
Again, if the reader cares to challenge any part of this,
she or he should certainly try to imagine an alternative
explanation of perception. It will appear, or it has always
appeared to date, that any and all such alternatives sound
not only queerer than this but totally unbelievable to
"people of common sense."
Well, to proceed, we have now an "external universe",
very large (comparatively speaking) and a model of same,
much smaller (comparatively speaking), the former
"outside" us and the latter "inside" us. Of course, some
correspondence or isomorphism exists between the
"external" and "internal" universes. Otherwise, I could not

Quantum Psychology

55

get up from my chair, walk to the door, go down the hall
and accurately locate the kitchen to get another cup of
coffee from something I identify as a Coffee Maker.
But where does our head exist?
Well, our head obviously exists "inside" the "external
universe" and "outside" our brain which contains the
model of the "external universe".
But since we never see or experience the "external
universe" directly, and only see our model of it, we only
perceive our head as part of the model, which exists inside
us. Certainly, our perceived head cannot exist apart from
our perceived body as long as we remain alive, and our
perceived body (including head) exists inside our
perceived universe. Right?
Thus, the head we perceive exists inside some other head
we do not, and cannot, perceive. The second head contains
our model of the universe, our model of this galaxy, our
model of this solar system, our model of Earth, our model
of this continent, our model of this city, our model of our
home, our model of ourselves and atop our model of ourselves
a model of our head. The model of our head thus occupies much
less space than our "real" head.
Think about it. Retire to your study, unplug the phone,
lock the door and carefully examine each step of this
argument in succession, noting what absurdities appear if
you question any individual step and try an alternative.
Let us, for Jesus sake and for all our sakes, at least
attempt to clarify how we can have two heads. Our
perceived head exists as part (a very small part) of our
model of the universe, which exists inside our brain. We
have already proven that, have we not? Our brain,
however, exists inside our second head — our "real" head,
which contains our whole model of the universe, including
our perceived head. In short, our perceived head exists
inside our perceived universe which exists inside our real
head which exists inside the real universe.
Thus, we can name our two heads — we have a "real"
head outside the perceived universe and a "perceived
head" inside the perceived universe, and our "real" head

How Do We Know.
now appears, not only much bigger than our perceived
head, but bigger than our perceived universe.
And, since we cannot know or perceive the "real"
universe directly, our "real" head appears bigger than the
only universe we do know and perceive — our perceived
universe, inside our perceived head.
The reader might find some comfort in the thought that
Bertrand Russell, who devised this argument, also
invented the mathematical class of all classes that "do not
contain themselves." That class, you will note, does not
contain itself unless it does contain itself. Also, it does
contain itself if and only if it does not contain itself. Got it?
When not busy crusading for rationalism, world peace,
common decency, and other subversive ideas, Russell
spent a lot of time in the even more subversive practice of
inventing such logical "monsters" to bedevil logicians and
mathematicians.
Returning to our two heads: Lord Russell never carried
this joke, or this profound insight, beyond that point. With
a little thought, however, the reader will easily see that,
having analyzed the matter this far, we now have three
heads — the third containing the model that contains the
"real" universe and the "real" head and the perceived
universe and the perceived head. And now that we have
thought of that, we have a fourth head...
And so on, ad infinitum. To account for our perception of
our perception — our ability to perceive that we
perceive — we have three heads, and to account for that,
four heads, and to account for our ability to carry this
analysis onward forever, we have infinite heads...
A model of consciousness which does arrive, very
rigorously and with almost mathematical precision of
logic, at precisely this infinite regress appears in The Serial
Universe by J. W. Dunne, who uses time instead of perception as his first term but still arrives at the conclusion that
we have, if not an infinite series of heads, an infinite series
of "minds".
Like the Zen teacher, I have just led you to the door of
the Law and slammed it in your face. But wait. We will

Quantum Psychology

57

eventually discern "light at the end of the tunnel." If we
can only open that damned door...
Or perhaps you have detected Mr. Fields' "Ubangi in the
fuel supply" already?
If not, let us proceed. Alfred Korzybski, mentioned here
several times (and a strong influence even when not
mentioned), urged that our thinking could become more
scientific if we used mathematical subscripts more often.
Thinking about this one day, I came up with the following analog of Dunne's argument without even using his
infinite time dimensions:
I observe that I have a mind. Following Korzybski, let us
call this observed mind, mindi.
But I observe that I have a mind that can observe mindj.
Let us call this self-observing mind, mind .
Mind2 which observes mindj can in turn become the
object of observation. (A little experience in Buddhist selfobservation will confirm this experimentally.) The
observer of mind then requires its own name, so we will
call it mind3And so on.. .to infinity, once again.
Of course, having mentioned Buddhism, I might in fairness add that the Buddhist would not accept "I observe
that I have a mind." The Buddhist would say "I observe
that I have a tendency to posit a mind."
But that, perhaps, allows the felix domesticus to escape the
gunnysack, as Mr. Fields would say.
2

2

Exercizes
1. Let the group look back at Exercize 1 at the end of
Chapter Two. Try to decide how many of the propositions
there, which I then asked you to force into the two categories "meaningful" and "meaningless" might fit just as
well into the category of Game Rules or the resultants of tacit
unstated) Game Rules.
2. Meditate upon the following quote from Lord
Russell's Our Knowledge of the External World (page 24):

58

How Do We Know.
The belief or unconscious conviction that all propositions
are of some subject-predicate form — in other words, that
every fact consists of some thing having some quality —
has rendered most philosophers incapable of giving any
account of the world of science and daily life.

Consider the subject-predicate form as a Game Rule.
3. Contemplate the following typical subject-predicate
sentences: "The lightning flashed suddenly." "It is now
raining out." "I have an uncontrollable temper."
Try to identify the subject, "it" in the sentence: "It is now
raining out."
See how subject-predicate Game Rules influence the
other two sentences. Can any of you restate them in more
phenomenological language?
Does any of this help you see the trick in the two-heads
(or infinite heads) argument?

SIX
The Flight From Reason &
The Cult of Instruments
Long, long before modern physics or modern psychology,
in ancient Greece, the Skeptics had already noticed that
Uncertainty, Indeterminacy and Relativity appear inescapable parts of human life, because what Xerox sees is
never exactly what Exxon sees. Plato, Aristotle and other
geniuses attempted to escape the agnosticism or Zeteticism
of the Skeptics by "finding," or claiming to find, a method
of Pure Abstract Reasoning that, they believed, would
arrive at Pure Truth without any distortions introduced by
our fallible human sense organs. Aside from a few conservatives in Chairs of Philosophy, the world now realizes
that the Greek search for such Pure Truth failed; and the
subsequent history of philosophy seems like a long detective story — the gradual discovery, century after century,
of the numerous "lies" (unconscious prejudices) that crept
into the Pure Reasoning of those bold Hellenic pioneers.
To speak caustically about it, one might say the Greek
Logicians suffered from the illusion that the universe
consists of words. It you found the right words, they seemed
to think, you would have Eternal Truth.
Then came modern science, a synthesis of Pure Reason in
the Greek tradition with humble empiricism in the
tradition of the craftsmen and artisans — with all results
expressed in the very precise special "languages" of
various branches of mathematics. It seemed, for a few
centuries, that science could solve all mysteries and answer
all questions. In science, reasoning about what the
59

во

How Do We Know...

Universe "should d o " (according to Logic) lived in a
marriage or feedback loop with increasingly subtle
instruments to tell us where and when the Universe failed
to agree with our Logic or our math — where our Logic
needed revision, or one type of math needed correction by
another. With sufficiently perfected instruments, it then
seemed, we could correct all our errors and arrive
eventually at the Pure Truth which Plato and Company
had thought they could trap with mere Logic itself,
without the instruments.
The universe now seemed to consist, not of words, but of
equations. Someday, we thought, we would know "bloody
all about bleeding everything," and describe it in elegant
mathematical formalisms. That faith died with Einstein's
Relativity and Plank's Quantum Mechanics, both of which
discovered, in different ways, that the human nervous
system aided by humanly designed instruments produces
results no more "infallible" than the human nervous
system unaided by instruments.
As an illustration: the Skeptics in ancient Greece had
observed the relativity of temperature as perceived by
humans. Every philosopher in Athens had heard their
experimental argument: if you hold your right hand in a
bowl of rather hot water and your left in a bowl of very
cold water, and then dunk both hands in a third bowl of
tepid water, the right hand will "read" the third bowl as
cold and the left will "read" it as hot.
The whole heroic effort of Plato and Aristotle, as we said,
amounted to an attempt to get beyond this sensory-sensual
relativity by use of Pure Reason.
Pure Reason, however, derives from axioms which can
neither be proven nor disproven. These axioms appear in
consciousness from a level of pre-logical apprehension in
which we might as well be gesticulating and pointing — or
waving sticks in the air like Zen Masters — instead of
talking, because we are trying to indicate or invoke
something that exists before words and categories.
Worse: the axioms (game rules) that seem natural or
undeniable in one tribe or culture do not seem at all natu­
ral and are often denied in other cultures. Hence, most of

Quantum Psychology

61

the "self-evident" axioms of Plato and his associates no
longer win assent from scientists, and many of them have
turned out to disagree with actuality (nonverbal experience) when scientists tried to check them.
Immanuel Kant perhaps composed the longest list of
defects in classical Greek "pure reason". One that has
received less publicity that most — much less publicity
than the Cretan who says Cretans always lie — goes like
this:
When an arrow gets fired from a bow toward a target it
appears to move through space.
However, at every instant the arrow actually occupies
one position in space, not two or three or more positions.
Thus, at every instant the arrow exists in one place, not
in two or three or more. In other words, at every instant
the arrow has a position.
If the arrow has one and only one definite position at
every instant, then at every instant it does not move. If it
does not move at any of these instants, it never moves at
all.
You cannot escape this Logic by positing instantsbetween-instants. In these nanotime units, the same logic
holds. At each nano-instant, the arrow has some location,
not several locations. Therefore, even in nano-instants, the
arrow does not move at all.
It seems the only way out of this absurdity consists of
claiming that the arrow does, after all, occupy two locations at the same time. Alas, this leads to worse problems,
which I leave you to discover for yourself.
And that shows where Logic gets you, if uncorrected by
observation (senses or instruments). If we do not correct
our Logic by comparing it with experience, we may go on
for centuries elaborating our most ancient errors endlessly — as seems obviously to have happened to cultures
that do not share our "self-evident" axioms.
But we seem as nutty to those cultures as they seem to
us. Every religion, for instance, seems to other religions
(and nonbelievers) the result of logical deductions from
axioms that just don't fit this universe.

62

How Do We Know..

So, then, let us by all means correct our Pure Reason with
actual experience of what people see and smell and
otherwise detect in the phenomenological or existential
world. Let us expand beyond abstract Pure Reason and
check our logic against our experience.
So, then: from this kind of argument, science emerged —
and seemed for a while ready and able to solve all our
problems.
Certainly, with its splendid equations and marvelous
instruments, science seemed to offer a better way to solve
nitty-gritty existential problems than Greek logic ever had.
Businessmen noticed this quickly and began funding
"research". Rationalist philosophers noted it later and
joyously assumed science could go beyond practicality —
the best model at a date — and also produce Pure Truth.
But then Einstein showed that two clocks can measure
different times — just like the two human hands
"measuring" different temperatures. The fallibility of our
nervous systems suddenly appeared also in our instruments; and Absolute Truth again eluded us.
Einstein, to repeat for emphasis, also demonstrated that
two rulers can measure different lengths. Then Quantum
Mechanics showed that different instruments can yield
radically different "readings" of space-time events in the
sub-atomic world. In the most shocking case of all, one
which still sends first year physics students reeling, one
instrumental set-up shows us a world made of discrete
bullet-like particles and the same instruments in a different
set-up show a world made of ocean-like energy waves.
This seemed "incomprehensible" to physicists at first
because, three hundred years after Galileo shot Aristotle's
physics full of holes, they were still thinking in the categories of Aristotle's logic, where X must "be" either a wave
or a particle and can't possibly "be" both a wave and a
particle, depending on how and when we "look" at it. For
a while, some physicists were actually talking, facetiously,
but also a bit desperately, about "wavicles".
In summary: we thought we could escape the relativity
and uncertainty of sense organs by building smart instruments, but now we have discovered the relativity of the

Quantum Psychology
instruments themselves. (I keep reiterating this because, in
my experience teaching seminars on non-Aristotelian logic
for 30 years, hardly anybody understand this at first. Most
people think they understand it, but they don't.)
Thus, when you examine a rose bush, whether you look
with your eyes (and brain) alone, or look with a variety of
scientific instruments, what you will "see" depends on the
structure of the instrument — your sensory apparatus
and/or the tools added to that apparatus.
Furthermore, what you can say about what you saw
depends on the structure of your symbolism — whether
you describe it in English, Persian, Chinese, Euclidean
geometry, non-Euclidean geometry, differential calculus or
quaternions.
This explains why, in Dr. Jones's words, "whatever we
are describing, the human mind cannot be parted from it."

Exercizes
1. Weather permitting, leave the house, go outside to the
street and look around. How much of what you see would
have existed if humans had not designed and built it? How
much that "just grew there" would look different if
humans had not cultivated and encouraged (or polluted)
it?
2. Look at the sky. If you can distinguish stars from planets, can identify some of them, etc., try to forget this
knowledge and imagine how the sky looks to very intelligent animals without human science. Then look at it again
with your knowledge of astronomy back in focus.
3. If a meteor passes, how does it make you feel when
trying to see without scientific glosses? How differently do
you feel when you allow yourself to remember what you
know of meteors?
4. Go back inside and discuss this:
If all TV shows about the police (about 20 a week in most
areas) went off the air and instead we had an equal
number of TV shows about landlords, would this change
the average American reality-tunnel?

How Do We Know.
In how many ways would the reality-tunnel change?
What would Americans "see" (or remember) that they
now tend to ignore? What would they become less aware
of? What would they become much more aware of?
5. Try to figure out why there are so many TV shows
about police and virtually no shows about landlords.
Who decides this? Why have they decided it this way?
(Attempt to avoid paranoid speculations or grandiose conspiracy theories, if at all possible.)

SEVEN
Strange Loops & the Infinite Regress

If we never describe anything "as it is" but only "as it
appears to our minds," we can never have a pure physics,
but only neuro-physics — i.e., physics as known through
the human nervous system. We can also never have pure
philosophy, but only neuro-philosophy — philosophy as
known through the human nervous system. And we can
never have pure neurology but only neuro-neurology —
neurology as known through the human nervous system...
But at this point we have already entered the arena of
Strange Loops, as some readers have guessed, for neuroneurology can only be known by the nervous system and
thus can only be known by a meta-science of neuro-neuroneurology...which can only be known through neuroпеиго-neuro-neurology...and so on, ad infinitum. Do you
detect Lord Russell's two-head argument looming on the
horizon at this point? Or even J. W. Dunne's infinite
regress of consciousnesses in time?
Some Zen bastard seems to have slammed the door of
the Truth in our face again.
This neurological regress precisely parallels a proof in
Quantum Mechanics, known as "Von Neumann's Catas­
trophe" (or "Von Neumann's Catastrophe of the Infinite
Regress", in full) which shows that we can add an infinite
number of instruments to our existing instruments and still
never get rid of some degree of Uncertainty and Indeter­
minacy. (By the end of this book the reader will hopefully
understand why this "coincidence" and dozens like it

65

66

How Do We Know.

inescapably link Quantum Mechanics with daily-life
psychology or ordinary kitchen-sink consciousness.)
At this point some readers may want to bail out or throw
the book away, thinking I shall soon lead them into the
bottomless abyss of solipsism or some neo-Berkeleyan
Idealism. Not at all: a stark dualism of Certainty versus
Uncertainty only appears in two-valued Aristotelian logic.
In mathematical logic, we do not have to choose between
Pure Certainty and Pure Uncertainty. Rather, in the mathematics of probability, we have infinite choices in between
those extremes.
For convenience we can reduce these to the traditional
100 used in ordinary percentages.
Thus, if Pure Certainty equals 100% and Pure Uncertainty equals 0%, the logic of Quantum Mechanics and of
the Quantum Psychology in this book does not tell us that
the impossibility of reaching 100% leaves us stuck at 0%
forever. Quite the reverse. Many things in daily life have
probabilities over 50%, which will satisfy any gambler and
keep up his interest; even better, some things have probabilities of 90%, 95% or even higher.
Personally, I never worry about the thermodynamic fact
that the probability of air remaining approximately evenly
distributed around this room never reaches 100%. The
probability that all the air will suddenly rush to one corner
and leave me to die in a vacuum has been calculated as
greater than 0% and much, much less than 0.001%, but I
refuse to get anxious about it.
The probability that I will get hit by a meteor tomorrow
seems much, much higher — maybe almost as high as
0.1% — but I don't worry much about that either.
The business person, like the physicist or gambler, has
long grown accustomed to this aspect of Quantum
Psychology. Businesses do not hope for 100% certainty in
making decisions (i.e., they do not judge grain futures by
religious Dogma) but they do not muddle about in endless
Hamlet-like indecision (total uncertainty), either. They
long ago learned to "guesstimate" or intuit probabilities,
and nowadays they have generally graduated from

Quantum Psychology
^uesstimating to precise estimating with mathematical
probability matrices in a computer.
Thus, the "loss of certainty" does not mean a descent into
the void of solipsism. It merely means a graduation from
the kindergarten level of "yes" (100%) or "no" (0%) to the
adult world of "how closely can we calculate the odds on
this happening?"(5%? 25%? 75%? 95%?)
I must admit, however, that the logic of probability does
lead to some weird implications. In this connection,
consider what I call the Jesus H. Christ Night.
Most math students, early on in their University years,
encounter the paradox of the Paddy Murphy Night. The
odds of getting two Paddy Murphys in the same class
seems small, but it does happen. What seems distinctly
odd to non-mathematicians — "the Paddy Murphy" paradox — consists in this: if the universe lasts long enough,
some lecturer must eventually confront a class consisting
entirely of men named Paddy Murphy. If you think about
it, you will easily see, intuitively, that this Paddy Murphy
Night must eventually occur. What staggers most people
lies in the result we get if we imagine a universe that last
an infinite number of years.
In that infinite universe, Paddy Murphy Night not only
occurs once, or several times, but an infinite number of
times. (However, non-Paddy Murphy Night also occurs an
infinite number of times. This illustrates Cantor's principle
that if you remove an infinite set from an infinite set,
another infinite set remains.. - )
Yesterday ( 2 / 3 / 1 9 9 0 ) I heard a popular talk-show host
(Dick Whittington, KABC, Los Angeles) mention that, in
high school, in The Bronx, New York, he actually had a
classmate named Jesus Christ. Mr. Whittington returned
1

2

1

For example, the set of whole numbers continues to infinity,
but so does the set of even numbers. If you subtract the even
numbers from the whole numbers, you still have an infinite set
of odd numbers.
Mr. Whittington remembered this because of a news bulletin
concerning a man named Joe Blow, who complained that his
name created problems in job-hunting. People would start laugh2

68

How Do We Know.

to this topic a few times, seemingly worried that his audience suspected him of a put-on. I felt inclined to believe
him, because when I attended high school, in Brooklyn, I
had a class-mate named Sven Christ, who told me that the
Scandinavian countries had many families named Christ.
Since many Hispanic families name their first son Jesus,
which they pronounce Hay-zeus but most non-Hispanic
Americans pronounce Gee-zuz, a Scandinavian-Hispanic
marriage could easily produce a son named Jesus Christ.
But then I remembered Paddy Murphy night, and realized that if the universe lasts long enough, some lecturer
will eventually confront an audience made up entirely of
men named Jesus Christ. And in an infinite universe, this
will happen an infinite number of times.
And, since Harry remains a popular middle name, some
lecturer, even in a finite universe, might some night confront an audience consisting of men named Jesus H. Christ
(or a mixed audience of Mary Christs and Jesus H.
Christs). In an infinite universe, an infinite number of lecturers will encounter an infinite number of such audiences.
However, although no mathematician would dispute
this, I will not live in eager anticipation of the night when
I, a frequent lecturer, encounter this audience of Jesus H.
Christs.
Just as I do not live in dread of all the molecules rushing
to the corner and leaving me to die in a vacuum.
I emphasize and will reiterate this because so many
people have been hypnotized by Aristotelian " y e s / n o "
logic to the extent that any step beyond that Bronze Age
mythos seems to them a whirling, dizzying plunge into a
pit of Chaos and the Dark Night of Nihilism.
This book on Quantum Psychology, then, attempts to
show that the Uncertainty and Indeterminacy of quantum
physics has its origin in our brains and nervous systems;
that all other knowledge has the same origin; and that the

ing when they saw his name on an application, Mr. Blow said,
and could not seem to take him seriously as a possible employee,
as if someone named Porky Pig had asked for a job.

Quantum Psychology
non-aristotelian logics invented by quantum physics
describe all other efforts of human beings to know and to
talk about the world of experience, on any level.
Mr. A in his office trying to understand why his boss acts
"unfairly," and Dr. В in her laboratory trying to under­
stand why a quantum function behaves as it does, must
both always remain part of a seamless unity with what
they seek to understand.
I do not consider this book Quantum Philosophy, how­
ever. I have called the ideas herein Quantum Psychology
because the consequences of Relativity, Uncertainty and
Indeterminacy have literally earth-shaking implications for
our daily lives, our "mental health," our relations with
other humans, and even our deepest social problems and
our relations with the rest of the Earth and the Cosmos
itself. As Count Alfred Korzybski noted in the 1930s, if all
people learned to think in the non-Aristotelian manner of quan­
tum mechanics, the world would change so radically that most of
what we call "stupidity" and even a great deal of what we
consider "insanity" might disappear, and the "intractable"
problems of war, poverty and injustice would suddenly
seem a great deal closer to solution.
Think about it.
The quest for Certainty in a world of Uncertainty creates
some amusing parallels between the life of an individual
and that of a civilization.
For instance, consider a hypothetical Joe Smith, born in
Canton, Ohio, in 1942. By the time of his tenth birthday in
1952, Smith had probably arrived at premature certainty
for the first time. He "believed i n " various doctrines
because his parents did — e.g., the superiority of the
Republican Party over all others, the similar superiority of
the Episcopalian Church, the desirability of racial segrega­
tion, the inevitability of all institutions (Church, State,
business etc.) remaining male dominated, and the necessity
of destroying World Communism, which all good people
(he knew) recognized as the major Evil on the planet.
By 1962 this particular Joe Smith, then 20 years old, had
arrived at Harvard and had mutated completely — taken a
quantum jump. He majored in sociology, considered

How Do We Know...
himself a Liberal, had severe doubts about the superiority
of Republicans and Episcopalians, and thought some kind
of modus vivendi with the Communists had to occur or the
world would blow itself up. He also felt "opposed to"
segregation but you would not find him doing anything
practical about it, and he still hadn't questioned male
superiority. He had again reached premature certainty and
believed the views of the professors he liked best represented the view of "all educated people." His parents now
seemed "ignorant" to him, although he felt ashamed to
think that.
Joe had no idea that the Revolution of the 1960s would
mutate him and his reality-tunnel in dozens of ways he
could not predict in 1962. He didn't foresee Freedom Rides
and Mississippi cops and clubs and tear-gas and LSD and
Woodstock and the Pentagon Demonstration and
Women's Liberation in his future at all, at all.
By 1972, Joe and some friends set a bomb in an unoccupied laboratory at night, to protest the use of technology in
a war he considered immoral. The United States government, and not Communism, now seemed to him the
supreme Evil in the world. He spouted Marxist jargon,
mixed with hippie mysticism, and again, having lived 30
Years, he had premature certainty.
Joe has probably spent most of the years since 1972, first
living a grubby underground life while waiting for the
statute of limitations to expire, and then "trying to get his
head back together again" — running on empty, in the
excellent metaphor of a recent film.
Similarly, Western Civilization reached premature
certainty with Plato and / o r Aristotle, reached a new kind
of premature certainty with Aquinas and the medieval
theologians, reached a third premature certainty with
Xewton and the Age of Reason etc. Today, the best
educated appear as if "trying to get their heads back
together again" and "running on empty." Western Civilization also has no suspicion that the Revolutions of the
next two decades will mutate it and its latest reality-tunnel
in dozens of ways we cannot predict in 1990...

Quantum

Psychology

7i

Review Exercizes
1. Have one member of the study group find a small rock
that fits easily into the human hand. At the weekly meeting, pass the rock around. Allow each person to hold and
examine the rock and attempt to say "all" about it
Continue this exercize until everybody realizes that we
never can say "all" about even a simple rock, or until
everybody becomes embroiled in a debate between those
who think eventually, in a few million years perhaps, we
can say "all" and those who think we can never say "all."
2. Have those who think we can eventually say "all"
about the rock set out to investigate the geological history
of the region where the rock comes from and report the
following week on "all" the history of the forces that
produced the region that produced that particular rock.
Have everybody else try asking questions to find important areas of information left out of this attempt to say
"all."
3. Attempt the same exercize with the room in which the
group meets. Have everybody take turns attempting to tell
"all" about the room. Then have somebody prepare a
report for next week on "all" about how the house came to
have its distinct design and location and that room within
it.
4. Have each person sit silently and write a description of
the house in which the group meets. Take about five minutes. Read the descriptions aloud, noting on a blackboard
or large pad:
(a) how many things appear on some lists and not on
others.
(b) how many things do not appear on any lists but can
quickly come to light with further investigation.
5. Have every person close her or his eyes and listen to
the sounds in the room and the sounds coming in from
outside. Let one person with a watch time this exercize to
last two minutes, then compare reports. Note how each
nervous system has heard different sounds.

72

Hour Do We Know.

6. Let the group attempt to say "all" about the city where
they meet.
7. Let the group attempt to say "all" about the economic
history of the city.
8. Let the group attempt to say "all" about the geological,
ecological and economic history of the region in which the
city exists.
9. Let the group again pass the rock around, silently. Let
every person to look at it in the manner of Zen meditation — without forming words in their heads. (Those without
experience in meditation will find this very difficult, but
try it anyway.)
10. Note especially the points at which any members of
the group begin to resist the exercizes — e.g., complain
"This is silly," "I know this already," "This is some kind of
put-on," etc. Note any symptoms of irritability. Pass no
judgments on one another when such reactions appear.
Discuss the factors that make these exercizes appear
"boring" (uninteresting) or "threatening" (too interesting)
to some kinds of people.
11. In another book, I suggested the new word sombunall
meaning "some but not all." In the week after doing the
above exercizes, let each member of the studv group try to
remember to ask, each time the word "all" occurs, "Can we
safely say 'all' here? Do we know enough? Would
sombunall perhaps fit the facts more closely?"

PART TWO
Speaking About the Unspeakable
It used to be thought that physics describes the universe.
Now we know that physics only describes what we can
say about the universe.
— Niels Bohr
"Reality? We don't got to show you no
steeeeenking reality."
— Dr. Nick Herbert, caricaturing the Copenhagen
Interpretation, Esalen Institute, February 1986

EIGHT
Quantum Logic

Dr. John von Neumann, one of the leading proponents of
Bohr's view that science cannot find "one deep reality"
underlying all relative instrumental realities, went one step
further than Bohr. Since the quantum world just does not
fit Aristotelian either/or logic, von Neumann invented a
three-valued logic that suits the quantum world better.
Aristotle left us with the two choices, "true" or "false".
Von Neumann added a "maybe." This corresponds in some
ways with Dr. Rapoport's "indeterminate" state, but
differs in other ways; it definitely excludes the "meaningless", which von Neumann, like Bohr, banned from scientific discourse entirely.
Some physicists (e.g., Dr. David Finkelstein) believe that
von Neumann has solved "all" (or maybe sombunall?) the
paradoxes that still linger even after we have accepted
Bohr's Cophenhagenian rejection of "deep reality". Others
regard 3-valued Quantum Logic as a mere "formalism" or
"trick" and not a true contribution to clarifying the
Indeterminacy and Uncertainty of quantum events.
Nonetheless, QL (quantum logic) applies very well to
ordinary affairs — quite contrary to the opinion of those
who assure us that quantum uncertainty does not invade
our daily lives and remains only on the sub-atomic level.
For instance, I toss a coin in the air. Unless it lands on
edge (a rare event) the coin definitely settles into an
Aristotelian either/or when it hits the floor — heads or
tails. No maybe.

75

Speaking About the Unspeakable
But in what state does the coin exist while flip-flopping
up from my hand and down to the floor? Some metaphysical doctrine of predestination may claim the coin exists as
heads or tails even before landing, because it has been predetermined that the coin will land that way. Scientifically,
such a proposition lies beyond the reach of testing, and so
we must consider it "meaningless". On the operational or
phenomenological level, the coin appears in a von
Neumann "maybe" state until it lands.
Similarly, Transactional psychology reveals that perceptions begin always in the "maybe" state. I walk down the
street and see good old Joe half a block away. If I haven't
studied brain science, I feel sure that the Joe I see "is
really" there, and I feel quite surprised when the figure
comes closer and I now see a man who only resembles
good old Joe slightly. My perception contained a "maybe"
but, conditioned by Aristotelian logic, I ignored this and
my conception leaped to premature certainty. (This
description has been simplified for logical clarity. In experience, the feedback loop from perception to conception and
back to perception operates so quickly, that we "see" what
we think we should see and the maybe virtually never
registers — until we re-train ourselves to register it.)
Whether something belongs in the "true/false" class or
in the maybe class usually depends on time considerations.
The coin belongs in maybe for a few seconds, while in the
air, but settles into either/or when it lands. "Mary did not
come to class today" will seem true to the teacher, seeing
absence-of-Mary or (technically) "non-presence of Maryness" in the class, but becomes a maybe if somebody alleges
that Mary has appeared in the distance, rushing toward
class; "Mary did not come to class today" can then shift to
the false category, replaced by "Mary arrived late for
class," the second she enters the room.
Many perceptions not only begin in the maybe state but
remain maybes forever, because the space-time events that
trigger them do not last long enough for us to justify definite verdicts. Nonetheless, we ignore this and, guided by
Aristotelian habit, assign definite verdicts anyway. Such

Quantum

Psychology

77

seems the explanation of those physicists who so often remark that uncertainty appears only in the quantum realm.
The UFO Verdict by Robert Sheaffer contains the premature certainty implied by the title. Mr. Sheaffer knows
what UFOs "really are" — they "really are" hoaxes and
hallucinations. Similarly, Flying Saucers Are Real by Major
Donald Keyhoe contains the dogmatism implied by the
title. Major Keyhoe also knows what UFOs "really are" —
they "really are" interplanetary spaceships. The perception
psychologist would note that UFOs come and go so fast,
usually, that most of them never graduate from the maybe
class. But we will expand on that in a more appropriate
place.
Aristotelian dogmatic habit also reinforces and gets
reinforced by ancient mammalian territorial imperatives.
Wild primates, like other vertebrates, claim physical territories; domesticated primates (humans) claim "mental"
territories — Ideologies and Religions. Thus, one seldom
hears a quantum maybe in discussions of Roosevelt's
economic policies versus Ronald Reagan's economic policies. Like Sheaffer and Keyhoe, most UFO believers and
UFO debunkers disagree about everything else, but share a
common aversion to the word maybe. And one virtually
never hears "Maybe Jesus was the son of God" or "Maybe
Islam is a false religion."
People ignore the quantum maybe because they have
largely never heard of quantum logic or Transactional
psychology, but they also ignore it because traditional
politics and religion have conditioned people for millenniums —
and still train them today — to act with intolerance and premature certainty.
In general, people judge it "manly" to pronounce dogmatic verdicts and fight for them, and to admit quantum
uncertainty (von Neumann's maybe) seems "unmanly."
Feminism often challenges this machismo, but, just as often,
certain Feminists appear to think they will appear stronger
if they speak and behave as dogmatically and unscientifically as the stupidest, most macho males.

Speaking About the Unspeakable
This tendency to premature verdicts receives considerable reinforcement, also, from the software our brains
habitually use — our language and our typical language
structure.
According to News of the Weird (by Shepherd, Cohut and
Sweet, New ^^rterican Library, 1989) — a book of nearly
incredible but seemingly true stories from respectable
newspapers — in 1987 a man in Rochester, New York, shot
a woman he mistook for his wife. "I'm sorry," he told
police. "I meant to shoot my wife, but I forgot my glasses."
His universe, like those of Sheaffer and Keyhoe, seems
built on quick verdicts and no maybes.
Same book — a man in Westchester shot his wife while
hunting. He told police he had mistaken her for a woodchuck.
Two more hunting accidents, in the same book — a man
shot a friend, who he mistook for a squirrel. Another man
shot a teen-age girl he mistook for a groundhog.
Another man in Virginia Beach killed his mother-in-law
with a hatchet and claimed he mistook her for a large
raccoon.
These stories have maybes in their maybes. I mean, after
all, maybe some of these people made up these alibis out
of desperation.
Then again, the world contains, not only UFOs (Unidentified Flying Objects) but also UNFOs (Unidentified NonFlying Objects): and those without von Neumann's threevalued logic and its maybes will often be too quick about
"understanding" and "identifying" them.
If you live in a busy part of a city, look out the window.
Observe how many UNFOs go past so quickly that they
never graduate from the maybe state to the "identified"
state.

Exercizes
Classify the following propositions as true, false or
maybe.

Quantum Psychology

79

A. In 1933, Franklin Roosevelt became President of the
United States.
B. In 1932, Franklin Roosevelt became President of the
United States.
C. On January 18,1932, Cary Grant had his 28th
birthday.
D. The river Necker flows through the city of Frankfurt.
E. The river Necker flows through the city of
Heidelberg.
F. Humanity evolved from Old World apes.
G. Force always equals mass multiplied by
acceleration.
H. Francis Bacon wrote the plays attributed to
Shakespeare.
I. Sex education leads to an increase in sex crimes.
J. In the years in which sex education increased in the
U.S., reported sex crimes also increased.
K. The census of 1890 showed 4,000,000 inhabitants of
New York City.
L. An ordinary pack of cigarettes contains 20 cigarettes.
M. Ronald Reagan knew about the Iran-Contra gunsand-cocaine deals of North, Secord and Hull.
N. Ronald Reagan did not know about the Iran-Contra
crimes until he heard the news on TV.
O. All the differences between men and women result
from cultural training.
P. Sombunall of the differences between men and
women result from cultural training.
Q. All differences between men and women result from
genetic factors (testosterone, estrogen etc.)
R. Sombunall of the differences between men and
women result from genetic factors (e.g., testosterone,
estrogen etc.)
Q. The lost continent of Atlantis exists under the sea
near Bermuda.
R. The lost continent of Atlantis never existed.
S. Hitler only had one testicle.
1

1

Have you found this word useful in the week since doing the
exercizes at the end of the last chapter?

NINE
How George Carlin Made Legal History

Everybody understands that you cannot drink the word
"water", and yet virtually nobody seems entirely free of
semantic delusions entirely comparable to trying to drink
the ink-stains that form the word "water" on this page or
the sound waves produced when I say "water" aloud. If you
say, "The word is not the thing," everybody agrees placid­
ly; if you watch people, you see that they continue to
behave as if something called Sacred "really is" Sacred and
something called Junk "really is" Junk.
This type of neurolinguistic "hallucination" appears so
common among humans that it usually remains invisible
to us, as some claim water appears invisible to fish, and we
will continue to illustrate it copiously as we proceed. On
analysis, this "word hypnosis" seems the most peculiar
fact about the human race. Count Alfred Korzybski said
we "confuse the map with the territory." Alan Watts said
we can't tell the menu from the meal. However one
phrases it, humans seem strangely prone to confusing their
mental file cabinets — neurolinguistic grids — with the
non-verbal world of sensory-sensual space-time.
As Lao-Tse said in the Tao Те Ching, 2500 years ago,
The road you can talk about is not the road you can walk
on.
(Or:
The way that can be spoken is not the way that can be
trodden.)

80

Quantum

Psychology

81

We all "know" this (or think that we do) and yet we all
perpetually forget it.
For instance, here in the United States — an allegedly
secular Democracy with an "iron wall" of separation
between Church and State written into its Constitution —
the Sederal Communications Commission has a list of
Seven Forbidden Words which nobody may speak on the
radio or television. Any attempt to find out why these
words remain Tabu leads into an epistemological fog, a
morass of medieval metaphysics, in which concepts melt
like Salvador Dali's clocks and ideas become as slippery as
a boat deck in bad weather.
One cannot dismiss this mystery as trivial. When comedian George Carlin made a record ("Occupation: Foole")
discussing, among other things, "The seven words you can
never say on television," WBAI radio (New York) played
the record, and received a fine so heavy that, although the
incident occurred in 1973, WBAI, a small listener-sponsored station, recently announced (1990) that they have not
yet paid all their legal costs in fighting the case, which
went all the way to the Supreme Court. The Eight Wise
Men (and One Wise Woman) thereon upheld the Federal
Communications Commission.
The highest court in the land has actually ruled on what comedians may and may not joke about. George Carlin has become
something more than a comedian. He now has the status of
a Legal Precedent. You will pay a heavy fine, in the U.S.
today, if you speak any of the Seven Forbidden Words on
radio or television — shit, piss, fuck, cunt, cocksucker, motherfucker and tits.
The words have been forbidden, "our" Government
says, because they "are" "indecent". Why "are" they
"indecent"? Because a certain percentage of people who
might turn on the radio or TV experience them as
"indecent".
Why do sombunall people experience these words as
"indecent"? Because the words "are" "dirty" or "vulgar".
Why "are" these words "dirty" and "vulgar" when other
words, denoting the same objects or events, "are" not

82

Speaking About the Unspeakable

"dirty" or "vulgar"? Why, specifically, can a radio station
be fined if a psychologist on a talk show says "He was so
angry he wouldn't fuck her anymore" but not fined at all if
the psychologist says "He was so angry he stopped having
sexual intercourse with her"?
As Mr. Ca«iin pointed out in the comedy routine which
led the Supreme Court to perform their even more remarkable comedy routine, fucking seems one of the most
common topics on television, even though nobody uses the
word. To paraphrase Mr. Carlin, many guests on the Merv
Griffin and Donahue shows have written books on how to
fuck or who to fuck or how to fuck better, and nobody
objects as long as they say "sexual intercourse" instead of
"fucking." And, of course, as Carlin goes on, the main
topics on soap operas, day after day, consist of who has
fucked whom, will she fuck him, will he fuck somebody
else, have they fucked yet, who's getting fucked now, etc.
Some say "fuck" "is" "dirty" and "sexual intercourse"
isn't because "fuck" comes from the Anglo-Saxon and
"sexual intercourse" comes from the Latin. But then we
must ask: how did Anglo-Saxon get to be "dirty" and why
does Latin remain "clean"?
Well, others tell us, "fuck" represents lower-class speech
and "sexual intercourse" represents middle-and-upper
class speech. This does not happen to accord with brute
fact, statistically: I have heard the word "fuck" in the daily
(non-radio) conversation of professors, politicians, business persons, poets, movie stars, doctors, lawyers, police
persons and most of the population of sombunall classes
and castes, except a few religious conservatives.
And, even if "fuck" did occur exclusively in lower-class
speech, we do not know, and can hardly explain, why it
has been subject to a huge and bodacious fine when such
other lower-class locutions as "ain't", "fridge" (for refrigerator), "gonna" and "whyncha" (why don't you) have not
fallen under similar sanction. Nor have we yet seen a ban
on the distinctly lower class "Jeet?" "Naw — J e w ? " (Did
you eat? No, did you?)

Quantum

Psychology

83

The fact that some enclaves of religious conservatives do
not use the word "fuck" (or are embarrassed if they get
caught using it) seems to provide the only clue to this mystery. The Federal Communications Commission, it seems,
bases its policy upon persons who believe, or for political
reasons^wish to seem to believe, that the rather paranoid
"God" of the conservative religions has His own list of
Seven Forbidden Words and will become quite irate if the
official Tabu list of our government does not match His
list. Since that particular Deity has a reputation for blowing
a few cities to hell whenever he feels annoyed, the F.C.C.
may, in the back of their heads, think they will prevent
further earthquakes by maintaining the Tabu on the Seven
Unspeakable Words.
The Wall of Separation between Church and State, like
many other pious pronouncements in our Constitution,
does not correspond with the way our government actually functions. In short, the Seven Forbidden Words remain
forbidden because pronouncing them aloud might agitate
some Stone Age deity or other, and we still live in the same
web of Tabu that controls other primitive peoples on this
boondocks planet.
Some light seems about to dawn in the semantic
murk...but let us press further and ask why the conservative's Stone Age "God" objects to "fuck" and not to "sexual
intercourse" or such synonyms as "coitus", "copulation",
"sexual congress", "sexual union", "love-making", etc.?
Should we believe this "God" has a violent prejudice
against words which, in reputation if not in reality, seem to
reflect lower-class culture? Does this "God" dislike poor
people as much as Ronald Reagan did?
Perhaps the reader will appreciate the immensity of this
mystery more fully if I ask a related question:
If the word "fuck" "is" obscene or "dirty", why isn't the
word "duck" 7 5 % "dirty"?
Or, similarly:
If the word "cunt" "is" unacceptable to the conservative's "God", why does the word "punt" not receive a 75%

Speaking About the Unspeakable
unacceptability rating? Why do we not see it spelled "p—"
in the daily press?
To quote the admirable George Carlin one more time,
"Such logic! Such law!"

^

Exercizes

1. Try to explain the difference between a Playboy centerfold and a nude by Renoir. Discuss among the whole
group and see if you can arrive at a conclusion that makes
sense when stated in operational-existential language.
2. Perform the same delicate semantic analysis upon a
soft-core porn movie and a hard-core porn movie.
Remember: try to keep your sentences operational, and
avoid Aristotelian essences or spooks.
3. When U.S. troops entered Cambodia, the Nixon
administration claimed this "was not" an invasion,
because it "was only" an incursion. See if anybody can
restate this difference in operational language.
4. The C.I.A. refers to certain acts as "termination with
maximum prejudice." The press describes these acts as "assassinations." Try to explain to each other the difference.
Also, imagine yourselves as the victims. Do you care
deeply whether your death gets called "termination with
maximum prejudice" or "assassination"?
5. In the 1950s, the film The Moon Is Blue, became a center
of controversy and actually got banned in some cities
because it contained the word "virgin." How does this
seem in retrospect? Discuss. (If anybody finds Mr. Carlin's
paraphrased jokes offensive let them explain why the
above film no longer seems offensive.)

TEN
Fussy Mutts & a City With Two Names

We have pointed out that nobody would try to drink the
ink-stains that form the word "water" on this page, yet
most people have semantic delusions and hallucinations
entirely similar to that. The reader has perhaps begun to
appreciate that this hardly qualifies as a hyperbole or
exaggeration.
To paraphrase Professor S. I. Hayakawa, when you go
into a restaurant you expect the menu to say "Choice Cut
of Top Sirloin Steak" and would be taken aback if it said
"A hunk of meat chopped off a dead castrated bull." Yet
the two verbal formulae refer to same non-verbal event in
the space-time continuum, as vegetarians would quickly
tell us.
Words do not equal in space-time the things or events they
denote, yet people react to a choice between words as if
making a choice between "real" things or events in the
existential world.
This "hypnosis by words" or "living in a cocoon of
words" can even lead to murder. Literally. I recall three
typical examples:
1. Several years ago in San Francisco, a man ordered an
extra portion of steak in a restaurant, saying he wanted to
take some home for his dog. The waiter commented that
he personally fed his own dog on Red Heart dog food. The
customer replied that his dog would not eat dog food and
demanded steak. The waiter said, "You've got one fussy
mutt there, mister." The man, badly hurt by these insensitive words, went home and brooded.
85

86

zreskzng About the Unspeakable

His beloved dog, a prince of canines, had been called "a
fussy mutt." He brooded more Imagine how you would
feel if your mother were called "a drunken old whore." To
this man, having his precious hound called "a fussy mutt"
apparently seemed equally insufferable. He went back to
the restaurant and shot the waiter dead.
2. Salman Rushdie recently composed the kind of orchestration of words and meanings we generally call a "novel",
as distinguished from a "poem*", an "insurance policy" or
a "political speech." The late rev. Ayatollah Khomeni
found this artistic arrangement of words as unbearable as
the Federal Communications Commission finds the Seven
Unspeakable Words on their Tabu List. As you have no
doubt read, the re*'. Ayatollah offered a reward of
$5,000,000 to whoever would go to England and shoot Mr.
Rushdie in the head with buliets.
(Mr. Rushdie had not referred to Mohammed as "a fussy
mutt," but what he did write, even if intended as art, impacted upon the rev Ayatollah as just as hurtful as "fussy
mutt" to the man in San Francisco. I
3. When the English conquered Ireland, they changed the
name of the old town of Deny to Londonderry. This has
proven unacceptable to many Irish patriots and utterly
insufferable to the Irish Republican Army. The Protestants
in the town, on the other hand, prefer "Londonderry" to
"Deny." As of 1990, if you say "Deny'" in one part of that
town you may well get shot by the Ulster Freedom
Fighters, and if you say "Londonderry" on the other side
of town vou mav get shot bv the I.R.A.
The U.F.F. believe their "fight "is" for the rights of the
Protestant rnajority in Northern Ireland; the I.R.A. believe
their fight "is* for the rights of the Catholic minority.
Whose civil rights seem realistically infringed when one
says "Deny™ instead of "Londonderry" or "Londonderry"
instead of "Deny-'?
If I write that what actually exists in sensory-sensual
space-time "is n o t ' "Deny or "Londonderry" but a
collection of people, houses, parks, bridges, pubs, streets

Quantum

Psychology

87

etc., I may seem to escape Ideology and move closer to
existential "reality" or common human experience. Right?
Wrong. On closer examination, this proves not quite the
case. "A collection of people, houses, streets etc." consists
of words and what you will find in that place in space-time
remains^somet/zmg not words but non-verbal "things" and
events.
"Non-verbal things and events," however, remains still
words...in English...and we seem to have landed in
another kind of Strange Loop.
Perhaps Zen Buddhism can enlighten us. After all, Zen
has promised Enlightenment for several hundred years
now.
A Zen koan of long standing goes as follows: The roshi
(Zen teacher) holds up a staff and says, "If you call this a
staff, you affirm. If you say it is not a staff, you deny.
Beyond affirmation or denial, what is it?"

Exercize
I suggest that readers reflect on what has been said so far,
about the Seven Forbidden Words and the "fussy mutt"
and the killings in Northern Ireland. Reflect on "the map is
not the territory" and "the menu is not the meal." Close
the book, close your eyes, sit quietly, and think about this
Zen riddle. Wait a minute and see if a light slowly dawns
on you.

ELEVEN
Wrtat Equals the Universe?

Hello. Welcome back. Whether you have solved the staff
riddle or not, I now invite vou to again consider the question: What equals the universe?
According to pious Roman Catholics, the philosophy of
Thomas Aquinas equals the universe. In other words,
everything in the universe exists also in the philosophy of
Aquinas and everything in Aquinas exists also in the
universe.
On the other hand, according to pious Russian Communists, the ideology of Dialectical Materialism as developed
by Marx, Engels and Lenin equals the universe. Everything
in the universe exists in Dialectical Materialism and everything in Dialectical Materialism exists also in the universe.
Disciples of Ayn Rand feel the same way about
Objectivism.
However, aside from Catholics, Marxists, Objectivists
and a few other dingbat groups like the Committee for
Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal or the
Hard Shell Baptists, most of us, in this technological age,
have at least a dim awareness that no coordination of
words, however skillfully orchestrated, quite equals the
whole universe. Whether we have ever stated it in the
words I used in Part One or not, we have come to realize
that nothing equals the universe except the universe itself.
Any philosophy, any theology, any coordination of
words, any mathematical model, any scientific "system"
must always remain something less than the whole universe. Such maps or models may describe large parts of the
88

Quantum Psychology

89

universe, but none of them can contain the whole universe.
The most advanced mathematical physics, for instance,
cannot predict what I will write in the next five minutes.
(Neither can I, as Bergson pointed out.)
Some maps seem to contain fairly large areas of fiction,
also -чжз possibility we always remember when consider­
ing other people's ideas but quickly forget when consider­
ing our own
Our maps and models of the universe — our realitytunnels — always contain something less than a life-size
working model of the universe, which we have not built
yet and probably never can build. Such a life-size model,
after all, would have to include you and me and every
other sentient being throughout space-time and the sensa­
tions and/or thoughts of all such beings. Since nobody
knows enough to build such a working model, nobody
understands the universe in full.
But you realized that already if you figured out the
answer to the Zen staff riddle. Right? However, if you still
feel discombobulated...
Try it this way:
Not only does the word "water", an ink-stain on the
page, not equal the experience of water, but our ideas
about water will never contain all possible human experi­
ences of water. The chemical formula for water, H z O, tells
us sombunall of what a chemist normally needs to know
about water — namely that it has two hydrogen atoms for
every oxygen atom — but it does NOT tell us, or attempt
to tell us, the difference between drinking a glass of water
on a hot day and being on a boat hit by several tons of
rapidly moving water during a tropical storm. Nor does it
tell us the difference between the role water plays in the
life of a goldfish, who cannot survive more than about two
minutes without water, and a human, who can survive
nearly a week without water, but not much longer than
that.

90

Speaking About the Unspeakable

Brief Exercize
Meditate on the difference between the two sentences following, and note how coding (typographical convention)
helps us distinguish the two meanings:
1. Water is not a word.
2. "Water" is a word.
Got it? No, you probably haven't. Not yet. You only
think you've got it...

Exercizes
1. Let everybody in the class pinch their upper arms.
2. Let everybody then speak the word "pinch" out loud.
3. Let everybody write the word "pinch" on a piece of
paper.
4. Let everybody again pinch their upper arms.
5. Discuss the differences among Exercizes 1 to 4.

TWELVE
• t h e Creation of Reality-Tunnels

Our models of the universe — our glosses or gambles —
have at least the following limitations and constraints
upon them.
1. Genetics. Our DNA happens to have evolved out of
standard primate DNA and still has a 98 per cent similarity
to chimpanzee DNA (and 85% similarity to the DNA of the
South American spider monkey).
We thus have basically the same gross anatomy as other
primates, the same nervous systems, basically the same
sense organs, etc. (Our more highly developed cortexes
allow us to perform certain "higher" or more complex
mental functions than other primates, but our perceptions
remain largely within the primate norm.)
The DNA and the sensory/neural apparatus produced
by the DNA creates what ethologists call the umzvelt
(world-field) perceived by an animal.
Dogs and cats see and sense a different umwelt or realitytunnel than primates. (Hence, Heinlein's Law: "No way
has ever been found to out-stubborn a cat.") Canine, feline
and primate reality-tunnels, however, remain similar
enough that friendship and communication among
canines, felines and primates occurs easily.
Snakes live in a much different umwelt. They see heat
waves, for instance, and seemingly do not see "objects."
The world seen by a snake looks fundamentally like a spiritualist seance — fields of "life-energy" floating about in
murk. That explains why a snake will strike at a hot air
balloon that invades its territory. To the snake, the heat in
91

92

Speaking About the Unspeakable

the balloon and the heat in a hunter's leg have the same
meaning — an intruder has arrived. The snake defends its
territory by striking in both cases.
Because the snake's umwelt or reality-tunnel differs so
fundamentally from mammalian reality tunnels, friendships between humans and snakes occur much less frequently than friendships between humans and mammals.
The belief that the human umwelt reveals "reality" or
"deep reality" seems, in this perspective, as naive as the
notion that a yardstick shows more "reality" than a voltmeter, or that "my religion 'is' better than your religion."
Neurogenetic chauvinism has no more scientific justification
than national or sexual chauvinisms.
The most ingenious recent attempt to revive classical
Aristotelianism occurs in Anthonv Stevens's book,
Archetypes, which argues that evolution must have
produced sense organs that reveal "truth" or "reality" or
something of the sort, or we would have become extinct by
now. This argument overlooks several facts; viz...
More species have become extinct than currently survive.
Most extinct species died of their own limitations before
humans arrived, and their demise did not result from
"human rapacity."
Many tribes of humans have become extinct.
Whole civilizations have destroyed themselves, some
clearly by following crazy deductions from inadequate
perceptions.
Considering evolution with these facts in mind, we see
that most animals perceive as accurate a reality-tunnel of
their local habitat as will statistically allow most members of
that species to survive long enough to reproduce. No
animal, including the domesticated primate, can smugly
assume the world revealed/created by its senses and brain
equals in all respects the real world or the "only real
world." It equals sombunall, not all.
2. Imprints. It appears (as of 1990) that animals have
brief periods of imprint vulnerability in which their
nervous systems can suddenly create a personalized
reality-tunnel unique to itself. These imprints permanently

Quantum

Psychology

93

bond neurons into reflex networks which seemingly
remain for life. The basic research on imprinting, for
instance, for which Lorenz and Tinbergen shared a Nobel
Prize in 1973, demonstrated that the statistically normal
snow-goose imprints its mother, as distinct from any other
goose, shortly after birth. This imprint creates a "bond"
and the gosling attaches itself to the mother in every way
possible.
These brief points of imprint vulnerability can literally
imprint anything. Lorenz, for instance, recorded a case in
which a gosling, in the temporary absence of the mother,
imprinted a ping-pong ball. It followed the ping-pong ball
about, nestled with it, and, on reaching adulthood,
attempted to mount the ball sexually. Another gosling
imprinted Dr. Lorenz himself, with equally bizarre results.
In any litter of puppies, you can easily observe how
rapidly Top Dog and Bottom Dog roles get imprinted. The
Top Dog eats more, grows larger and continues as Top
Dog for life; the Bottom Dog remains submissive and
"timid."
A quick examination of any human community lends
plausibility to Dr. Timothy Leary's hypothesis that most
humans have imprinted Top Dog or Bottom Dog roles just
as mechanically as canines do. (In sombunall mammals, of
course, some individuals imprint roles midway between
Top and Bottom, and thus hierarchy appears...)
How and when we imprint language seems to determine
lifelong programs of "cleverness" (verbal facility) or
"dumbness" (verbal clumsiness). This reflects in our
speech, and, since thinking consists largely of juggling
words sub-vocally, in our ability to handle concepts, solve
problems, etc.
How and when our pubertal sexuality gets imprinted,
similarly, seems to determine lifelong programs of heterosexuality or homosexuality, brash promiscuity or monogamy, etc. In both common sexual imprints like these and in
more eccentric imprints (celibacy, foot fetishism, sadomasochism etc.) the bonded brain circuitry seem quite as
mechanical as the imprint which bonded the gosling to the

94

Speaking About the Unspeakable

ping-pong ball. (Anybody who doubts this can try
responding sexually to a stimulus that never turned them
on before, or totally ignoring a stimulus that normally does
turn them on.)
Thus, nobody enters a room with their genetic primate
neurology ^ the only constraint on what they will
perceive. Depending on imprints, one may "see" from a
clever heterosexual Top Dog position, from a clever homosexual Top Dog perspective, from a dumb homosexual
Top Dog position, from a dumb heterosexual Bottom Dog
perspective, from a smart celibate Bottom Dog vantage etc.
etc. The permutations and possibilities seem quite large,
although finite.
Genetics and hard-wired imprints do not make up the
whole of the software which programs our selves and our
perceived universes. There remain:
3. Conditioning. Unlike imprinting which requires only
one experience and sets permanently into the neurons,
conditioning requires many repetitions of the same experience and does not set permanently. Behaviorists, also,
know how to reverse conditioning by counter-conditioning, but only Dr. Timothy Leary has claimed to know how
to reverse imprinting. (Curiously, laws currently forbid
other scientists to repeat and test Dr. Leary's experiments,
and threaten them with prison if they do get caught repeating this research. The idea that the Inquisition died 170
years ago seems, like the Separation of Church and State,
just another myth, unconnected with how "our" government actually functions.)
4. Learning. Like conditioning, this requires repetition
and it also requires motivation. For these reasons, it seems
to play less of a role in human perception and belief than
genetics and imprinting do and even less than conditioning does.
It seems, as of 1990, that all snakes perceive virtually the
same reality-tunnel, with only minor imprinted differences. Mammals show more conditioned and learned differences in their reality-tunnels. (Most "clever dog" stories
that get into newspapers illustrate that some particular dog

Quantum Psychology

95

has imprinted a model of the world unlike that of any
other dog we have known.)
Humans, due to our complicated cortex and frontal
lobes, which permit more conditioning and learning, and
also due to our prolonged infancy (which probably
permits morjgjmprints, and more eccentric imprints) seem
to differ more from each other than any other mammals.
Thus, an Irish dog, an Afghani dog, a Russian dog etc.,
generally understand each other fairly well. The canine
reality-tunnel has more commonalities than differences, as
we have said. However, an Irishman wrapped in a
Catholic reality-tunnel and a Top Dog personality may
have great difficulty understanding an Afghani living in a
Moslem reality-tunnel with a Bottom Dog personality, and
both may find it impossible to communicate at all with a
Russian homosexual communist Top Dog.
This variability of humans can function as the greatest
evolutionary strength of the human race, since it may allow
us to learn from persons imprinted and/or trained to see and hear
and smell and think those things we have learned not to see or
hear of smell or think.
Due to our habit of premature certainty, however, this
variability seldom serves that beneficial evolutionary function. More often, when meeting somebody with a different
gloss or umwelt, we merely label that person "mad" or
"bad" — crazy or evil — or both.
This may explain most of the hostility on this planet, and
most of the wars.
Apologists for certain authoritarian/dogmatic groups
(the Vatican, the U.S. State Department, the Politburo,
CSICOP) spend most of their time constructing "proofs"
that anybody who does not share their reality-tunnel has
serious mental or moral defects or "is" a damned liar.
Again: I call this book Quantum Psychology rather than
Quantum Philosophy because understanding and internalizing (learning to use) these principles can decrease dogma, intolerance, compulsive behavior, hostility, etc. and also may increase
openness, continuous learning, "growth" and empathy —

Speaking About the Unspeakable
sombunall of which represent goals sought in most forms
of psychotherapy, and sombunall forms of mystic religion.

Exercizes
1. Let ощ member of the study group write to the Flat
Earth Research Society, Box 2533, Lancaster, CA 93539. Let
him or her present to the group some good arguments that
the flatness model of Earth fits the facts better than the
sphere model.
Let all members attempt to listen calmly, rationally,
objectively.
Let all members observe that this attempt to listen with­
out prejudice seems very much more difficult than you
would expect in advance.
2. Let another member of the group similarly research
and present a defense of Islam (especially its attitude
toward women).
Again, attempt to listen without prejudice, and observe
how hard this seems.
3. Let another member research the brilliant scientist
Nikola Tesla, father of alternating current grids, and pre­
sent to the group Tesla's reasons for rejecting Relativity.
4. Let another member research and present the case
against Evolution.
Again: More profit will come from doing these exercizes
than from merely reading about them.

THIRTEEN
E and E-Prime
In 1933, in Science and Sanity, Alfred Korzybski proposed
that we should abolish the "is of identity" from the English
language. (The "is of identity" takes the form X is a Y. E.g.,
"Joe is a Communist," "Mary is a dumb file-clerk," "The
universe is a giant machine," etc.) In 1949, D. David Bourland Jr. proposed the abolition of all forms of the words
"is" or " to be" and the Bourland proposal (English without "isness") he called E-Prime, or English-Prime.
A few scientists have taken to writing in E-Prime (notably Dr. Albert Ellis and Dr. E.W. Kellogg III). Bourland, in
a recent (not-yet-published) paper tells of a few cases in
which scientific reports, unsatisfactory to sombunall members of a research group, suddenly made sense and became
acceptable when re-written in E-Prime. By and large, however, E-Prime has not yet caught on either in learned
circles or in popular speech.
(Oddly, most physicists write in E-Prime a large part of
the time, due to the influence of Operationalism — the
philosophy that tells us to define things by operations
performed — but few have any awareness of E-Prime as a
discipline and most of them lapse into "isness" statements
all too frequently, thereby confusing themselves and their
readers.)
Nonetheless, E-Prime seems to solve many problems that
otherwise appear intractable, and it also serves as an
antibiotic against what Korzybski called "demonological
thinking". Most of this book employs E-Prime so the
reader could begin to get acquainted with this new way of
97

98

Speaking About the Unspeakable

mapping the world; in a few instances I allowed normal
English, and its "isness" to intrude again (how many of
you noticed that?), while discussing some of the weird and
superstitious thinking that exists throughout our society
and always occurs when "is" creeps into our concepts. (As a
clue or t u n i n g , I placed each "is" in dubious quotation
marks, to highlights its central role in the confusions there
discussed.)
As everybody with a home computer knows, the software
can change the functioning of the hardware in radical and sometimes startling ways. The first law of computers — so
ancient that some claim it dates back to dark, Cthulhoid
aeons when giant saurians and Richard Nixon still dominated the earth — tells us succinctly, "Garbage In, Garbage
Out" (or GIGO, for short).
The wrong software guarantees wrong answers, or total
gibberish. Conversely, the correct software, if you find it,
will often "miraculously" solve problems that had hitherto
appeared intractable.
Since the brain does not receive raw data, but edits data as it
receives it, we need to understand the software the brain uses.
The case for using E-Prime rests on the simple proposition
that "isness" sets the brain into a medieval Aristotelian
framework and makes it impossible to understand modern
problems and opportunities. A classic case of GIGO, in
short. Removing "isness" and writing/thinking only and
always in operational/existential language, sets us, conversely, in a modern universe where we can successfully
deal with modern issues.
To begin to get the hang of E-Prime, consider the following two columns, the first written in Standard English and
the second in English Prime.

Quantum

Psychology

Standard English

99

English Prime

1. The photon behaves as a
wave when constrained by
certain instruments.
2. The photon is a particle. 2. The photon appears as a
particle when constrained by
other instruments.
3. John appears unhappy
3. John is unhappy and
grouchy.
and grouchy in the office.
4. John appears bright and
4. John is bright and
cheerful.
cheerful on holiday at the
beach.
5. The car involved in the
5. In memory, I think I recall
hit-and-run accident was a the car involved in the hitblue Ford.
and-run accident as a blue
Ford
6. That seems like a fascist
6. That is a fascist idea.
idea to me.
7. Beethoven is better than 7. In my present mixed state
of musical education and
Mozart.
ignorance Beethoven seems
better than Mozart to me.
8. Lady Chatterley's Lover 8. Lady Chatterley's Lover
seems like a pornographic
is a pornographic novel.
novel to me.
9. Grass is green.
9. Grass registers as green to
most human eyes.
10. The first man stabbed
10.1 think I saw the first
the second man with a
man stab the second man
knife.
with a knife.
1. The photon is a wave.

In the first example a "metaphysical" or Aristotelian
formulation in Standard English becomes an operational or
existential formulation when rewritten in English Prime.
This may appear of interest only to philosophers and
scientists of an operationalist/phenomenologist bias, but

1

100

Speaking About the Unspeakable

consider what happens when we move to the second
example.
Clearly, written in Standard English "The photon is a
wave" and "The photon is a particle" contradict each
other, just like the sentences "Robin is a boy" and "Robin is
a girl." -Monetheless, all through the nineteenth century
physicists found themselves debating about this and, by
the early 1920s, it became obvious that the experimental
evidence could not resolve the question, since the experimental evidence depended on the instruments or the
instrumental set-up (design) of the total experiment. One
type of experiment always showed light traveling in
waves, and another type always showed light traveling as
discrete particles.
This contradiction created considerable consternation. As
noted earlier, some quantum theorists joked about
"wavicles". Others proclaimed in despair that "the
universe is not rational" (by which they meant to indicate
that the universe does not follow Aristotelian logic). Still
others looked hopefully for the definitive experiment (not
yet attained in 1990) which would clearly prove whether
photons "are" waves or particles.
If we look, again, at the translations into English-Prime,
we see that no contradiction now exists at all, no
"paradox", no "irrationality" in the universe. We also find
that we have constrained ourselves to talk about what
actually happened in space-time, whereas in Standard
English we allowed ourselves to talk about something that
has never been observed in space-time at all — the "isness"
or "whatness" or Aristotelian "essence" of the photon.
(Niels Bohr's Complementarity Principle and Copenhagen
Interpretation, the technical resolutions of the wave/particle duality within physics, amount to telling physicists to
adopt "the spirit of E-Prime" without quite articulating
E-Prime itself.)
The weakness of Aristotelian "isness" or "whatness"
statements lies in their assumption of indwelling "thingness" — the assumption that every "object" contains what
the cynical German philosopher Max Stirner called

Quantum

Psychology

101

"spooks". Thus in Moliere's famous joke, an ignorant
doctor tries to impress some even more ignorant lay persons by "explaining" that opium makes us sleepy because
it has a "sleep-producing property" in it. By contrast a
scientific or operational statement would define precisely
how the stricture of the opium molecule chemically bonds
to specific receptor structures in the brain, describing actual
events in the space-time continuum.
In simpler words, the Aristotelian universe assumes an
assembly of "things" with "essences" or "spooks" inside them,
where the modern scientific (or existentialist) universe assumes a
network of structural relationships. (Took at the first two
samples of Standard English and English Prime again, to
see this distinction more clearly.)
Moliere's physician does not seem nearly as comical as
the theology promulgated by the Vatican. According to
Thomist Aristotelianism (the official Vatican philosophy)
"things" not only have indwelling "essences" or "spooks"
but also have external "accidents" or appearances. This
"explains" the Miracle of the Transubstantiation. In this
astounding, marvelous, totally wonderful, even mindboggling Miracle, a piece of bread changes into the body of
a Jew who lived 2000 years ago.
Now, the "accidents" — which include everything you
can observe about the bread, with your senses or with the
most subtle scientific instruments — admittedly do not
change. To your eyes or taste buds or electron microscopes
the bread has undergone no change at all. It doesn't even
weigh as much as a human body, but retains the weight of
a small piece of bread. Nonetheless, to Catholics, after the
Miracle (which any priest can perform) the bread "is" the
body of the aforesaid dead Jew, one Yeshua ben Yusef,
whom the goys in the Vatican call Jesus Christ. In other
words, the "essence" of the bread "is" the dead Jew.
It appears obvious that, within this framework, the
"essence" of the bread can "be" anything, or can "be"
asserted to "be" anything. It could "be" the essence of the
Easter Bunny, or it could "be" Jesus and the Easter Bunny
both, or it could "be" the Five Original Marx Brothers, or it

102

Speaking About the Unspeakable

could "be" a million other spooks happily co-existing in
the realm outside space-time where such metaphysical
entities appear to reside.
Even more astounding, this Miracle can only happen if
the priest has a Willy. Protestants, Jews, Zen Buddhists etc.
have ordained many female clergy-persons in recent
decades, but the Vatican remains firm in the principle that
only a male — a human with a Willy — can transform the
"essence" of bread into the "essence" of a dead body.
(Like the cannibalism underlying this Rite, this phallusworship dates back to Stone Age ideas about "essences"
that can be transferred from one organism to another.
Ritual homosexuality, as distinguished from homosexuality-for-fun, played a prominent role in many of the pagan
fertility cults that got incorporated into the Catholic metaphysics. See Frazer's Golden Bough and Wright's Worship of
the Generative Organs. It requires a phallus to transmute
bread into flesh because our early ancestors believed it
requires a phallus to do any great work of Magick.)
In Standard English we may discuss all sorts of metaphysical and spooky matters, often without noticing that we
have entered the realms of theology and demonology, whereas in
English Prime we can only discuss actual experiences (or
transactions) in the space-time continuum. English Prime
may not automatically transfer us into a scientific universe,
in all cases, but it at least transfers us into existential or
experiential modes, and takes us out of medieval theology.
Now, those who enjoy theological and/or demonological
speculations may continue to enjoy them, as far as I care.
This book merely attempts to clarify the difference between theological speculations and actual experiences in
space-time, so that we do not wander into theology without realizing where we have gotten ourselves. The
Supreme Court, for instance, wandered into theology (or
demonology) when it proclaimed that "fuck" "is" an indecent word. The most one can say about that in scientific
E-Prime would read: "The word 'fuck' appears indecent in
the evaluations of X per cent of the population," X found
by normal polling methods.

Quantum

Psychology

103

Turning next to the enigmatic John who "is" unhappy
and grouchy yet also "is" bright and cheerful, we find a
surprising parallel to the wave/particle duality. Remaining
in the reality-tunnel of Standard English, one might decide
that John "really is" manic-depressive. Or one speaker
might defii.de that the other speaker hasn't "really"
observed John carefully, or " i s " an "untrustworthy
witness." Again, the innocent-looking "is" causes us to
populate the world with spooks, and may provoke us to
heated debate, or violent quarrel. (That town in Northern
Ireland mentioned earlier — " i s " it "really" Derry or
Londonderry?)
Rewriting in English Prime we find "John appears
unhappy and grouchy in the office" and "John appears
bright and cheerful on holiday at the beach." We have left
the realm of spooks and re-entered the existential or phenomenological world of actual experiences in space-time.
And, lo and behold, another metaphysical contradiction
has disappeared in the process.
To say "John is" anything, incidentally, always opens the
door to spooks and metaphysical debate. The historical
logic of Aristotelian philosophy as embedded in Standard
English always carries an association of stasis with every
"is", unless the speaker or writer remembers to include a date,
and even then linguistic habit will cause many to "not
notice" the date and assume " i s " means a stasis (an
Aristotelian timeless essence or spook).
For instance, "John is beardless" may deceive many
people (but not trained police officers) if John becomes a
wanted criminal and alters his appearance by growing a
beard.
"John is a Protestant" or "John is a Catholic" may change
any day, if John has developed a habit of philosophical
speculation.
Even stranger, "John is a Jew" has at least five different
meanings, some of which may change and some remain
constant, and only one of which tells us anything about
how John will behave in space-time.

104

Speaking About the Unspeakable

Perhaps I'd better enlarge on that last point. "John is a
Jew," according to Rabbinical law, means that John had a
Jewish mother. This tells us nothing about John's politics
or religion, and less than nothing about his taste in art, his
sexual life, his favorite sports etc.
"John is a J e w " in Nazi Germany, or in anti-Semitic
enclaves in the U.S. today, means that John had one known
ancestor somewhere who could be classified as "Jewish"
by one of these five contradictory definitions. Again, this
tells us nothing about how John will behave.
"John is a Jew" in some circles means that John practices
the Jewish religion. At last we have learned something
about John. He will certainly attend Temple regularly...or
fairly regularly. (But we still don't know how strictly he
will follow the kosher laws...)
"John is a Jew" in some other circles means that, while
John rejects the Jewish religion, he identifies with "the
Jewish community" and (if he has become famous) might
speak "as a Jew" at a political rally. (We still don't know,
e.g., whether he will support or criticize current Israeli
policies.)
"John is a Jew" can also mean that John lives in a society
where, for any one of the above reasons, people regard
him as a Jew, and he perforce has to recognize this
"Jewishness" as something — even if only a spook — that
people usually "see" when they think they see him.
Literary critics, usually considered careful and analytical
readers, or more careful and analytical that most, referred
to Leopold Bloom, the hero of James Joyce's Ulysses, as a
"Jew" for over 40 years. Only in the last decade or so have
Joyce scholars begun arguing about whether Bloom "is" a
Jew or not. (Bloom qualifies as Jewish in only two of the
five meanings above and appears not-Jewish in three. Does
that make him " 4 0 % Jewish" or 60% "not-Jewish"? Or
both?) The emerging consensus of Joycean studies now
appears to recognize that Joyce gave Bloom a very tangled
genetic/cultural background just to create this ambiguity
and thereby satirize anti-Semitism more sharply.

Quantum

Psychology

105

I may seem eccentric to suggest that, without formulating E-Prime explicitly, Joyce, like his great contemporary,
Bohr, wished us to see beyond the fallacy contained in
"isness" statements. Just like Schroedinger's cat ("dead" in
some eigenstates, "alive" in others) Bloom does not make
sense as a man in an environment until we recognize that
both his "Jewishness" and his "non-Jewishness" play roles
in his life, at different times, within different environments.
Incidentally, within the structure of Standard English,
"Marilyn Monroe was a Jew" qualifies as correct, although
dated, even though she had no known Jewish ancestors, no
Jewish mother, did not show much "community feeling"
with other Jews, and hardly ever got called a Jew in print.
Nonetheless, while married to Arthur Miller, Marilyn
practiced the Jewish religion and therefore in Standard
English "was" more of a Jew than some of my atheist
friends of Jewish ancestry. But returning to John...
"John is a plumber" also contains a fallacy. John may
have quit plumbing since you last saw him and may work
as a hair dresser now. Stranger things have happened. In
E-Prime one would write "John had a job as plumber the
last I knew."
Trivial? Overly pedantic? According to a recent article
Professor Harry Weinberg — curiously, an old acquaintance of mine — once tried to emphasize these points to a
class by trying to make them see the fallacy in the statement "John F. Kennedy is President of the United States."
Dr. Weinberg pointed out that the inference, Nothing has
changed since we came into this classroom, had not been
checked by anybody who insisted the statement about
Kennedy contained certainty. Weinberg, like his students,
got the lesson driven home with more drama that anybody
expected, because this class occurred on November 22,
1963, and everybody soon learned that during that class
time John F. Kennedy had died of an assassin's bullet and
Lyndon B. Johnson had taken the oath as President of the
United States.
1

1

"Statement of Fact or Statement of Inference" by Ruth Gonchar
Brennan, Temple Review, Temple University, Winter 1988-89.

Speaking About the Unspeakable
That makes the idea kind of hard to forget, doesn't it?
Looking at sample five — "The car...was a blue Ford"
we might again encounter Bertrand Russell's two-head
paradox. It seems a blue Ford exists "in" the head of the
witness, but whether the blue Ford also existed "outside"
that head remains unsure. Even outside tricky psychology
labs, ordinary perception has become problematical due to
the whole sad history of eye-witness testimony frequently
breaking down in court. Or does the "external universe"
(including the blue Ford) exist in some super-Head somewhere? It seems that the translation into E-Prime — "I
recall the car...as a blue Ford" better accords with the
experiential level of our existence in space-time than the
two heads and other paradoxes we might encounter in
Standard English.
James Thurber tells us that he once saw an admiral,
wearing a 19th Century naval uniform and old-fashioned
side-whiskers, peddling a unicycle down the middle of
Fifth Avenue in New York. Fortunately, Thurber had
broken his glasses and had not yet received replacements
from the optometrist, so he did not worry seriously about
his sanity. In the Castro section of San Francisco, a wellknown homosexual area, I once saw a sign that said
"HALF GAY CLEANERS" — but when I looked again, it
said "HALF DAY CLEANERS".
Even Aristotle, despite the abuse he has suffered in these
pages, had enough common sense to point out, once, that
"I see" always contains fallacy; we should say "I have
seen." Time always elapses between the impact of energy
on the eye and the creation of an image (and associated
name and ideas) in the brain, which explains why three
eyewitnesses to a hit-and-run such as we postulate here
may report, not just the blue Ford of the first speaker, but a
blue VW or maybe even a green Toyota.
I once astonished a friend by remarking, apropos of UFOs,
that I see two or three of them a week. As a student of
Transactional Psychology, this does not surprise or alarm
me. I also see UNFOs, as noted earlier — and I do not rush
to identify them as raccoons or groundhogs, like some

Quantum Psychology

юу

people we met earlier. Most people see UNFOs, without
thinking about the implications of this, especially when
driving rapidly, but sometimes even when walking. We
only find UFOs impressive because some people claim
they " a r e " alien spaceships. My UFOs remain Unidenti­
fied, since they did not hang around long enough for me to
form even a guess about them, but I have found no
grounds for classifying them as space-ships. Anybody who
does not see UFOs frequently, I think, has not mastered
perception psychology or current neuroscience. The sky
contains numerous things that go by too quickly for any­
body to identify them.
My own wife has appeared as an UNFO to me on occa­
sion — usually around two or three in the morning when I
get out of bed to go to the John and then encounter a
Mysterious and Unknown figure emerging from the dark
at the other end of the hall. In those cases, fortunately,
identification did not take long, and I never reached for a
blunt instrument to defend myself. Whatever my critics
may suspect, I never mistook her for a squirrel.
If you think about it from the perspective of E-Prime, the
world consists mostly of UFOs and UNFOs. Very few
"things" (space-time events) in the air or on the ground
give us the opportunity to "identify" them with certainty.
In example six — "That is a fascist idea" versus "That
seems like a fascist idea to m e " — Standard English
implies an indwelling essence of the medieval sort, does
not describe an operation in space-time, and mentions no
instrument used in measuring the alleged "fascism" in the
idea. The English Prime translation does not assume
essences or spooks, describes the operation as occurring in
the brain of the speaker and, implicitly, identifies said
brain as the instrument making the evaluation. Not acci­
dentally, Standard English also assumes a sort of "glass
wall" between observer and observed, while English Prime
draws us back into the modern quantum world where
observer and observed form a seamless unity,
In examples 7 and 8, Standard English again assumes
indwelling spooks and continues to separate observer from

ю8

Speaking About the Unspeakable

observed; English Prime assumes no spooks and reminds
us of Q U I P (the QUantum Inseparability Principle, so
named by Dr. Nick Herbert), namely, the impossibility of
existentially separating observer and observed.
Meditating on example 9 will give you the answer to a
famous Zen koan, "Who is the Master who makes the grass
green?" It might also save you from the frequent quarrels
(mostly occurring between husbands and wives) about
whether the new curtains "are really" green or blue.
Example 10 introduces new subtleties. No explicit " i s "
appears in the Standard English, so even those trained in
E-Prime may see no problem here. However, if the obser­
vation refers to a famous (and treacherous) experiment
well-known to psychologists, the Standard English version
contains a hilarious fallacy.
I refer to the experiment in which two men rush into a
psychology class, struggle and shout, and then one makes
a stabbing motion and the other falls. The majority of
students, whenever that has been tried, report a knife in
the hand of the man who made the stabbing (knife-wield­
ing) motion. In fact, the man used no knife. He used a
banana.
Look back at the re-translation into E-Prime. It seems
likely that persons trained in E-Prime will grow more
cautious about their perceptions and not "rush to judg­
ment" in the manner of most of us throughout history.
They might even see the banana, instead of hallucinating a
knife?

Exercizes
1. Have the group experiment with rewriting the follow­
ing Standard English sentences into English Prime.
Observe carefully what disagreements or irritability may
arise.
A. "The fetus is a person."
B. "The zygote is a person."

Quantum

Psychology

109

C. "Every sperm is sacred/Every sperm is great/If a
sperm is wasted/God gets quite irate." (Monty
Python)
D. "Pornography is murder." (Andrea Dworkin)
E. "John is homosexual."
F. "The table is four feet long."
G. "The human brain is a computer."
H. "When I took LSD, the whole universe was
transformed."
I. "Beethoven was paranoid, Mozart was manicdepressive and Wagner was megalomaniac."
J. "Today is Tuesday."
K. "Lady Chatterley's Lover is a sexist novel."
L. "Mice, voles and rabbits are all rodents."
M. "The patient is resisting therapy."
N. "Sin and redemption are theological fictions. The
sense of sin and the sense of redemption are actual
human experiences." (Paraphrased from Ludwig
Wittgenstein.)
2. Repeat the experiment of passing the rock around the
group, with each person trying to sense and feel the rock
without forming any words about the rock in their brains.
3. Let each member of the group contemplate the following sentences, then let each one pick out the sentence that
she or he would find most embarrassing to say out loud:
A. My mother was a drunken whore.
B. I am a cock-sucking homosexual queer.
C. I am a dyke and I'm proud of it.
D. I have always been a coward.
E. I am afraid to be alone in the dark.
F. I would be very happy if my spouse dropped dead.
Let each member speak out loud the sentence that
arouses the most emotional resistance.
Let other members observe the tone and "body language" of the person trying to say something he or she
dreads to say. Observe especially smiles (how sincere do
they look?) or embarrassed giggles.

110

Speaking About the Unspeakable

Let the members discuss the results of this. Especially, let
them discuss why, after studying a chapter about the
differences between words and non-verbal existence, most
of us still fear certain words or ideas. And let them note
how everybody probably showed (by tone, body-language
etc.) that they did not "mean" what they said, as compared
to the performance of a good actor who could speak any of
these sentences with total conviction.
Recall the famous "penis" scene in the film, Born on the
Fourth of July (in which Tom Cruise as a paralyzed veteran
tries to explain to his mother what lifelong impotence
means to him). Compare his "sincerity" and conviction in
shouting that his penis will not get hard ever again with
the comparative lack of "sincerity" of the class, who have
presumably not had dramatic training.
How do actors learn to get beyond the taboos that
control most of us? Do any of you, of heterosexual preference, think you could portray a homosexual as well as
Brando once did? Why not? Discuss this in the group.

PART THREE
The Observer-Created Universe
Organized skepticism is a two-edged sword. It allows us to
question orthodoxy as well as unorthodoxy... The scientist
who claims to be a true skeptic, a zetetic, is willing to
investigate empirically the claims of the American Medical
Association as well as those of the faith-healer; and more
important, he should be willing to compare the empirical
results of both before defending one and condemning the
other.
— Marcello Truzzi, Ph.D.
The Zetetic Scholar, Nos. 12-13 (1987)

FOURTEEN
The Farmer & The Thief
An old Chinese parable tells of a farmer who noticed that
his coin purse had disappeared. Searching everywhere, he
could not find the purse, and he became convinced that it
had been stolen. Thinking back over who had visited his
house recently, the farmer decided he knew who had
stolen the purse — the son of a neighbor. The boy had
visited the house the very day before the purse disappeared, and nobody else had had an opportunity to
commit the burglary.
The next time the farmer saw the boy, he noticed plenty
of behavioral "clues" to support his suspicious. The boy
had a definitely furtive and guilty manner about him and,
in general, looked as sneaky as a barn-rat. Knowing he had
no legal proof, the farmer could not decide what to do. But
every time he saw the boy after that, the guilty behavior of
the lad increased markedly, and the farmer grew angrier.
Finally, he felt so much anger that he decided to go to the
boy's father and make a formal accusation.
Just then the farmer's wife called him. "Look what I
found behind the bed," she said — and handed him the
missing coin purse.
Taoist philosophers have often cited this parable, and
point out that we can explain the innocent boy's "guilty"
behavior in two ways:
1. Possibly, the boy never behaved in a way that would
have looked guilty, "furtive," sly etc. to anybody else
except the suspicious farmer. The farmer saw all these
things only because he expected to see them.
113

114

The Observer Created Universe

That makes sense, even though it may undermine all our
dogmas if we think about it deeply enough. If you ever
noticed that, in a political quarrel, the people who agree
with you seem justifiably angry at the tactics of the other
side, while the other side seems "too bloody emotional to
think straight" — or, if, like me, you once saw a sign
saying "HALF GAY CLEANERS" in a homosexual neighborhood — or if you ever saw a creature that appeared
half-horse and half-deer, like two men whose experience I
recounted in The New Inquisition — you can understand
that much of this parable.
Remember, also, the gent who shot his wife, convinced
she "was" a squirrel.
Perhaps training in E-Prime and von Neumann's y e s /
no/maybe logic might prevent such "projections" (as the
Freudians say)?
Let us remember that Transactional psychology has
proven that, contrary to common sense and the prejudices
of centuries, our minds do not passively receive impressions from the "external world." Rather we actively create
our impressions: out of an ocean of possible signals, our
brains notice the signals that fit what we expect to see, and
we organize these signals into a model, or reality-tunnel,
that marvelously matches our ideas about what "is really" out
there.
One might that say the boy's guilt always remained in
the " m a y b e " state existentially, until the purse reappeared, but the boy's guilt gradually moved beyond
existential "maybe" to subjective certainty as the farmer's
perceptions reinforced his suspicions.
Aristotle only noted that "I see" actually means "I have
seen." Modern neuroscience reveals that "I see" (or "I
perceive") actually means "I have made a bet." In the time
between the arrival of signals at our eye or other receptor
organ and the emergence of an image or idea in our brains,
we have done a great deal of creative "artistic" work. We
generally do that work so fast that we do not notice ourselves doing it. Thus, we forget the gamble in every
perception and feel startled (or even annoyed) whenever

Quantum

Psychology

"5

we come up against evidence that others do not "see" what
we "see."
Constant reminding ourselves that we do not see with our eyes
but with our synergetic eye-brain system working as a whole
will produce constant astonishment as we notice, more and more
often, how much of our perceptions emerge from our preconceptions.
Training ourselves to write in E-Prime will vastly accelerate our progress in "internalizing" (learning to use) this
modern knowledge. Speaking and thinking in E-Prime take
much longer to learn, and relapses into "isness" occur 20
years, 40 years, or longer, after we think we have learned
this lesson.
2. But Taoists also point out that the boy in the story may
indeed have developed some "guilty" behaviors — fear of
looking the farmer directly in the eye, for instance — just
because he had become aware that the farmer suspected
him of something.
We have entered the area of what behavioral science calls "selffulfilling prophecies." This sort of thing happens to all of us.
Some man repeatedly seems cold or unfriendly; we
become a bit reserved ourselves, or try to avoid him. We
have started to behave as he expected us to behave.
You, a male, have to have a business meeting with a
Feminist who expects all, not sombunall, men to act
unfairly or brutally. You try to remain calm and judicious,
but her attitude annoys you more and more. Eventually,
her hostility keys off your hostility. A prophecy has
fulfilled itself: you have "proven" to her that her view of
men as dangerous creatures has just had itself confirmed
one more time.
Or: you, an Afro-American, confront a cop who "knows"
all, not sombunall, Afro-Americans "are" violent and
dangerous. He uses excessive force. You get angry and
fight back. You have just confirmed your suspicion about
white cops — and he has confirmed his suspicion about
Afro-Americans.
Dealing with paranoids brings this circular-causal
process into particularly sharp focus. No matter what

116

The Observer Created Universe

gambit you try, each act reinforces the paranoid's conviction that you, too, serve the Conspiracy that persecutes
him. Unless you work as a psychotherapist and have him
as a patient, you will eventually give up entirely and stop
trying to persuade him you have not joined any plots
against him: you just avoid him as much as possible. The
result? Your avoidance becomes one more item in his long
list of "proofs" of your guilt.
Medical researchers know that every innovative therapy
produces its best results when new, and some therapies
only produce results when new. For instance, the oncetouted "cancer cure," Krebiozen produced several notable
cures in its early days, but nobody has reported any cures
with Krebiozen in around 30 years now. In cases of this
sort, the enthusiasm of the researchers somehow communicates itself to the patients, who then "give themselves
permission" to get well.
Such cures-by-suggestion seem "miraculous" — or at
least "mysterious" — to most of us. This again indicates
word-hypnosis, or confusing the map with the territory.
We have two words in English (and related languages), "mind"
and "body", and we tend to think the universe must also have a
similar bifurcation. When we think in a more modern scientific language — in terms of the-organism-as-a-whole or
psychosomatic synergy etc. — such cures do not seem
either miraculous or mysterious.
Patients fed on a high dose of Optimism statistically fare
somewhat better than those fed only on grim Pessimism.
This should appear no more astounding than the recorded
fact that children who see a lot of violent horror movies
have more sleep disorders than children who see only
comedies.
If you treat a young man as a thief, he will begin to act
uncomfortable around you, which looks to the naked eye
much like a young man acting guilty. If a doctor expects
the patient to get well, this has some effect on the patient;
if the doctor expects the patient to die, this also has an
effect. Christian Science practitioners and other "faithhealers" could not remain in business if such self-fulfilling

Quantum

Psychology

117

prophecies did not work out significantly often, statistically, in a variety of illnesses, sometimes even very serious
illnesses.
Similarly, every imperialistic or conquering nation has
proclaimed that the subject people "are" shiftless or lazy or
dirty or ignorant or unreasonable or irrational or generally
"inferior." Most subjugated peoples very quickly begin to
exhibit the behaviors consistent with these labels. One can
study this process among the Irish during 800 years of
British conquest, among Native Americans under White
domination, among Africans kidnapped into slavery,
among women during the past 3000 years of Patriarchy,
etc.
The same self-fulfilling prophecies often occur to immigrant groups. In America, the Irish statistically became
very "lazy" when consigned to that role; but when enough
individual Irish people had resisted the label strongly
enough to become a powerful (and pugnacious) force in
politics and business, the "laziness" of the Irish-Americans
as a whole group "miraculously" began to decline. (Then it
became the turn of the Puerto Ricans to play the Bottom
Dog role...)
I once knew a woman in Chicago whose daughter had
her whole academic life changed by labels. On entering
grammar school, this girl seemingly scored low on an intelligence test and got assigned to a "slow learners" class.
Due to the tracking system, the girl remained among the
slow learners all through her eight years in that school.
Then, entering high school, the girl took another intelligence test and scored in the top one per cent. She then got
placed in an "accelerated" class and began showing the
high intelligence which had remained dormant all through
grammar school.
Did the new label create the newly apparent intelligence?
Or should we just assume that the grammar school test
results got mixed up and this girl received somebody else's
score by mistake? I prefer the latter theory, but...on the
other hand...

n8

The Observer Created Universe

Every time I pass through customs between Mexico and
the U.S. I feel certain sensations of anxiety. I "know" I have
no illicit drugs in my car, but I begin to wonder, confronted by the hostile and suspicious eyes of the Texas Border
Patrol, if some damned drug or other somehow got into
the car without my knowledge... Did somebody who
dislikes my books "plant" some to frame me? Did some
young idiot admirer of my works slip some into a video
cassette case, a book or other gift as a surprise, not knowing I intended to cross a border the next day? Do these
Border people sometimes "plant" drugs themselves, to
improve their arrest record? Like Joseph K. in The Trial I
begin to feel sure they will find me guilty of something,
even though I do not know of any crime I have committed.
When I finally get through customs, I feel an irrational
sense of freedom, victory and personal vindication.
A friend of mine who the police once questioned in
connection with a rape, went through the same sensations.
At first, when the two officers began asking him to account
for his movements that afternoon, he felt sure that he
would get arrested, even though innocent. When the police
asked several neighbors to confirm his alibi, and they
did — he happened to have appeared very visible to them,
working on his front lawn, when the crime occurred 20
blocks away — the police let him go at once. He felt irrationally happy, as if he had "gotten away with something."
When people with guns treat you as possibly guilty, you
begin to feel possibly guilty.
I suspect that African Americans and women will understand this section better than the average white male will.

Exercizes
1. The Cold War, now seemingly coming to a close,
lasted 45 years (1945-1990). Discuss the role of self-fulfilling prophecies in American and Russian foreign policy
during that 45 years. Discuss especially the Arms Race.
2. Children, psychologists say, tend to believe things
literally. Discuss the following typical parental utterances

Quantum

Psychology

119

and how they might function as self-fulfilling prophecies;
discuss also if any of you heard these in childhood and
have accepted them as Life Scripts ever since.
A. You never do anything right.
B. You're so lazy you're going to end up on Welfare.
C. You have a terrible temper. You're going to hurt
somebody seriously some day.
D. You've never been a healthy child.
E. Don't let me ever catch you doing that again.
F. You're going to get fat as a pig, the way you eat.
G. You're just not as smart as your brother.
H. Don't touch that part of your body again or you
might go crazy.
3. Discuss the following Game Rules as self-fulfilling
prophecies.
A. "The poor you will always have with you."
(J. Christ)
B. "Jews make the best doctors."
C. "We will put a man on the moon within a decade."
(J. Kennedy)
D. "We don't have the money to build more housing."
E. "We will build the Star Wars technology and place it
in orbit, no matter how much it costs."
F. "The masses are feminine. They want a strong man
to lead them." (A Hitler)
G. "All men are created equal.. .and endowed by their
Creator with certain unalienable rights.. .among
these rights are life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness." (T. Jefferson)
H. "Someday we can abolish hunger" (various 19th
Century Futurists)
I. "We can abolish hunger by 1995." (R. Buckminster
Fuller)

FIFTEEN
Psychosomatic Synergy
Let us return to psychosomatic medicine, since it illustrates
the principle of the self-fulfilling prophecy in a peculiarly
dramatic way.
In 1962 a young man named Vittorio Michelli arrived at
the Military Hospital of Verona, Italy, suffering from a
progressive carcinoma of the left hip. The whole hip
appeared eaten away by the cancer and the left leg seemed
about to separate from the body. Despite all the doctors
could do, Michelli's disease worsened and the actual bone
of the pelvis began disintegrating. The case seemed
hopeless.
On May 24, 1963, Michelli left the hospital and went to
Lourdes, where he bathed in the allegedly "miraculous"
waters and experienced what he described as sudden
sensations of heat moving through his body. His appetite,
which had virtually disappeared, suddenly returned and
he began eating heartily again. He felt new life and new
energy; he began to gain weight. After about a month he
returned to the hospital and had an X-ray examination.
The tumor appeared visibly smaller. In follow-up examinations, the doctors found that the tumor had completely
disappeared and the bone began to regrow and completely
reconstructed itself.
Some people (Roman Catholics, New Agers, heretical
holistic physicians, etc.) will eagerly believe this yarn.
Other people (the Committee for Scientific Investigation of
Claims of the Paranormal (CSICOP), the American Medical

120

Quantum

Psychology

121

Association, old-fangled Village Atheists etc.) just as
eagerly wish not to believe it at all, at all.
My source for the Michelli's case: "Healing, Remission
and Miracle Cures," by Brendan O'Regan, Institute of
Noetic Sciences, May 1987. O'Regan's source: the International Medical Commission on Lourdes, consisting of 25
scientists, including four physicians, four surgeons, three
orthopedists, two psychiatrists, a radiologist, a neuropsychiatrist, an ophthalmologist, a pediatrician, a cardiologist,
an oncologist, a neurologist, a biochemist and two general
practitioners. Ten of these 25 scientists hold chairs in medical schools.
Six thousand alleged cures have been claimed at Lourdes
since 1858 and only 64 have passed the scrutiny of the
International Medical Commission. The Michelli case
passed all their protocols of authenticity.
Since millions have visited Lourdes in the hope of such
"miracles", and only 63 others beside Michelli have passed
scientific investigation, these "miracles" do not seem, to
me, to prove the omnipresence or the omnibenevolence of
the Catholic "God". In fact, in my personal judgment, were
I to accept that "God", I would wonder why the hell He
only cures people who travel to Lourdes, and only a few of
them, and doesn't have the compassion to cure everybody
at once. Rather than assuming that a personalized anthropomorphic "God" does the things that happen at Lourdes,
I prefer to consider Lourdes a trigger, and perhaps not the
only trigger, that can set off a healing process in certain
people prepared for such a synergetic bio-chemical-physical transformation.
In 1957, agitated by Martin Gardner and other Inquisitorial dogmatists later prominent in CSICOP, the U.S.
government burned all the books of Dr. Wilhelm Reich,
invaded his laboratory to smash his experimental equipment with axes, and threw Dr. Reich in jail where he
shortly died of a heart attack. Dr. Reich, and about 18 other
physicians working with him, had been reporting good
results treating a variety of ailments with a device Dr.
Reich invented, called the Orgone Energy Accumulator,

The Observer Created Universe

122

which allegedly concentrated an alleged healing energy
called Orgone.
All the books of Reich remained out of print in this
country for over ten years and two still remain out of
print, even though one concerns the extremely serious
health problem of atomic radiation. The journals published
by Dr. Reich's Orgone Institute also remain out of print.
A few copies of Reich's journals can be found in the
private libraries of various medical heretics. I looked
through a pile of them once and found x-rays, taken by Dr.
Victor Sobey, of a tumor that visibly shrank during a series
of orgone treatments.
Members of CSICOP will insist that Dr. Sobey faked
those photos, probably. Those less committed to Dogma
will, I guess, have to choose between two Heresies:
(1) Despite the Infallible Authority of Government
Bureaucrats, the damned "orgone" does exist, after all, or
(2) the belief in "orgone" can cause patients to boost their
own immune systems and fight off otherwise fatal disease.
Curiously, the first perceptible effect of using an orgone
accumulator, reported by all who have tried it, consists of
a sensation of heat moving through the body. Just like the
Michelli case at Lourdes.. /•
But let us return to Krebiozen, a matter seemingly less
eldritch than cures at Lourdes or tumors destroyed by an
officially non-existent energy. A very successful Krebiozen
treatment, reported by Dr. Philip West, involved a cancer
patient called "Mr. Wright" in Dr. West's account. Mr.
Wright had fever, multiple tumors and could not get out of
1

1

In a review of my book, The New Inquisition, Robert Sheaffer
argues that worrying about book-burning amounts to "shedding
crocodile tears" when the books only remained banned for ten
years. Since most of the books banned in Nazi Germany came
back into print in about ten years, presumably Mr. Sheaffer
regards those who expressed horror about this as also "shedding
crocodile tears." He also neglects to mention that two of Dr.
Reich's books remain banned after 43 years.
Sensations of heat moving through the body also appear in
kundalini yoga. Funny coincidence.
2

Quantum

Psychology

123

bed when treatment began. The staff believed he would
die in a matter of days. Within a week after Krebiozen
treatment began, Mr. Wright got out of bed, began walking
about the wards and chatted happily with everybody,
convinced that a cure had taken place. His tumors had
shrunk to half their previous size.
Later, alas, when Mr. Wright learned that other patients
did not respond so favorably to Krebiozen, and that doctors had begun to consider the chemical worthless against
cancer, he became depressed and worried. His tumors
began growing again, he returned to his bed, and he died.
Fundamentalist Materialists can only rejoice over this
downbeat ending if they conveniently forget that orthodox
allopathic medicine has no explanation of why the tumors
measurably shrunk when Mr. Wright believed he had
gotten a "miracle cure".
On the other side of the dark coin of psychosomatic
synergy: a South Sea shaman points a "death bone" at a
tribesman who has offended him. The victim receives the
best possible medical care from sympathetic doctors, who
don't believe in Black Magic, but he shortly dies anyway. It
appears that the unfortunate man died of the belief that
"death bones" can kill people.
Thousands, or tens of thousands, of sick people get cured
every year by Christian Science practitioners and other
"faith healers". The outstanding Christian Science cures
appear quarterly in Christian Science Sentinel. Look through
a year or so of back issues and you will find a plethora of
seeming cures of seemingly real cases of asthma, cancer,
hypertensions, headache, sinus congestion and just about
anything and everything in the catalog of human illness.
The American Medical Association does not like to look at
these reports at all, and CSICOP would probably like to
burn them — but only for ten years, hopefully.
Without Christian Science, shamanism, orgone or anything of that sort, the Liberal activist, Norman Cousins, has
1

2

1

See The Psychobiology of Mind-Body Healingby Ernest Lawrence
Rossi, Ph.D., Norton, 1988, pages 3-8.
Rossi, op. cit. p 9-12.

2

124

The Observer Created Universe

three times cured himself of major illnesses using the
hypothesis that each human contains a healing energy that
most of us do not know how to use.
Sent to a tuberculosis sanitarium at age 10, Cousins
observed that the optimistic patients statistically tended to
recover and get released, while the pessimists did not. He
consciously became an optimist, recovered and has led a
rich, productive life, editing the Saturday Review for many
years, founding the Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy
etc.
In 1979, Cousins contracted a rare disease, ankylosing
spondylitis, which slowly paralyzes the body and inevitably
(except for Cousins) ends in death within a year. Cousins
checked out of the hospital into a hotel (a safer place to live
when ill, and usually much, much cheaper...) and treated
himself with high doses of laughter (he spent his days
looking at comedy on video, especially Marx Brothers
movies and Candid Camera). A heretical physician also
gave him massive doses of Vitamin С intravenously. Cous­
ins recovered totally and walked normally again, the first
such cure of this disease in medical literature.
In 1983, Cousins suffered a myocardial infarction and
congestive heart failure — a combination that usually
results in panic and death. Cousins refused to panic or die.
He now teaches at the UCLA Medical School, probably the
only layman on the staff, trying to show doctors how to
activate this fighting spirit, or healing spirit, within each
patient. (Recounted by Rossi, op. cit. pages 13-15, also see
Cousins' own book, Anatomy of an Illness.)
"Spontaneous remission" — the sudden disappearance
of an illness, without any known cause, or any contributing
factor in the form of belief in Christian Science or Orgone
or anything of that sort, including Mr. Cousins's heal­
ing/ fighting spirit — happens so frequently that every
doctor I have ever questioned on the matter admits to
having seen some cases. Nobody understands "sponta­
neous remission" and there appears strong evidence that
medical bureaucracy, as an organized political-economic
entity, does not even want to think about it. Brendan

Quantum Psychology

125

O'Regan, op. cit. found, after a prolonged search of medical
data bases, that only two books seem to exist in Englishlanguage medical literature about spontaneous remission, and
both do not appear in print at present. You need to go to a rarebook dealer to find them.
Dr. John Archibald Wheeler, called the father of the
hydrogen bomb in some circles (others attribute paternity
in that regrettable case to Dr. Edward Teller) has repeatedly urged that the simplest, most honest explanation of
quantum paradoxes holds that the known universe results
from the observations of those who observe it. This "observer-created universe" bears an uncanny resemblance to
some of our data about "self-fulfilling prophecies," it
begins to appear.
Of course, the ideal observer of quantum mechanics
remains a creature hooked up to many subtle instruments.
In psychology, the "observer" remains a bag of protoplasm, the resultant of genes, imprints, conditioning and
learning. The genes presumably appear at random
throughout the population; the imprints occur by accident
at points of imprint vulnerability; conditioning and learning depend on family tradition, etc. and these factors,
rather than a whimsical (or perverse) "God" probably
account for who will and who will not respond to Lourdes,
or to Christian Science, or to a shaman's "death-bone", etc.
Thus, in a famous Sufi story, Mullah Nasrudin, wisest
man in Islam, entered England on a visit. "Do you have
anything to declare?" asked the customs inspector.
"No — sssssst, bzzz — nothing at all."
"How long do you plan to stay?"
"Oh, about — sssssssszzzzt, bzzz — about three weeks."
"By the way, where did you learn English?"
"From the — bzzz, bzzz, sszzzzzzzbzz — radio."
Our brain software programs what we will see and will
not see, just as the software in my computer programs
what I can and cannot do with this page. (I decided to
write this on Microsoft Word and find I cannot do some
things I could do with MacWrite, and can do some things I
could not do with MacWrite.)

126

The Observer Created Universe

But, if our brain software programs our selves and our
universes, who programs our brain software? The accidents of history and environment, it seems — in most
cases. But learning to internalize and use the principles of
Quantum Psychology (or similar systems) adds a new
factor. In that case we can gradually learn to program our
programs... Dr. John Lilly calls this metaprogramming.

Exercizes
1. Each member of the study group had a particular gloss
or reality-tunnel imposed in childhood. Discuss your
parents' gloss and to what degree this still determines the
universe you perceive.
2. Play-act that your group have all grown up in Moslem
nation. Discuss how that would influence your reception
of the ideas in this chapter.
3. Try the same exercize with the group play-acting a
class of engineers in a Moscow university.

SIXTEEN
Moon of Ice
Readers of James Joyce's Portrait of the Artist as a Young
Man will recall the horrific opening scene, in which the
child, Stephen Dedalus, becomes thoroughly terrified by a
superstitious servant, who tells the boy that if he does not
apologize for some unspecified "sin", eagles will come and
pull out his eyes. Stephen hides under the table while the
threat, with its awkward and unintentional rhyme, pounds
through his mind: Pull out his eyes/Apologize/Apologize/Pull out his eyes...
Joyce scholars regard this sequence as autobiographical.
In an early fragment by Joyce, in the Cornell Joyce
Collection, Joyce appears as the boy threatened with the
eye-devouring eagles.
When Joyce began to write novels revealing the sexual
side of Irish Catholic life — the Great Unspoken Secret in
that country — he became the target of a campaign of
vilification almost without parallel in literary history. His
eyes began to bother him. He went from one eye specialist
to another, and never achieved more than temporary relief.
One of the eye specialists said Joyce's problem had psychological roots, but offered no suggestions about how to
reach and remove those roots. Others resorted to the knife.
Joyce underwent eleven painful eye operations in seventeen years, and became "legally blind" although not
"medically blind" toward the end of his life.
The fact that Joyce put the eagle/eye story at the beginning of his most autobiographical novel indicates that, on
some level, he understood the "curse" that had been laid
127

128

The Observer Created Universe

on him. It appears that, like the Polynesian tribesman
victimized by the death-bone, Joyce could not resist the
"curse" — despite his agnosticism and skepticism. This
perhaps indicates the degree of our malleability during
those sensitive moments that ethologists call points of
imprint vulnerability. And it may also indicate Joyce's
awareness of the pain his books caused to pious Catholics.
(He never did apologize...)
Kenneth Burke, who first suggested that Joyce's eye
problems resulted from that traumatic early imprint, has
also suggested that Darwin understood, as well as Joyce,
the pain and rage his work caused ordinary Christian
readers. Darwin, Burke commented, had so many inexplicable and incurable medical problems that he treated
himself with higher and higher doses of opium.
An old English drinking song, allegedly humorous but
also (I think) actively nefarious, begins as follows:
Oh, my name it is Sam Hall, it is Sam Hall,
Damn your eyes!
My name it is Sam Hall,
And I hate you one and all,
Damn your eyes!
Yes, I hate you one and all,
You're a gang of buggers all,
Damn your eyes, damn your eyes!
When one begins to appreciate the roles of unconscious
suggestibility and self-fulfilling prophecies in human life,
this song seems as funny as the latest radioactive fall-out
figures.
The Whitmore and Miranda rulings of the U.S. Supreme
Court — ending certain police practices once ubiquitous
here and still widely practiced elsewhere — resulted from
evidence that quite ordinary people, not guilty of any
crimes, will in many cases confess to anything the police
charge, if they cannot communicate with attorneys or anyone
else except the police officers who are holding them.
(Isolation begins any brain-washing process. See my
Prometheus Rising, Falcon Press, 1983, for further details.)

Quantum

Psychology

129

In County Kerry, Ireland, in 1986, a whole family named
Hayes — eight people — confessed to an act of infanticide
which subsequent evidence proved conclusively they had
not committed. One elderly member of the family later
received a diagnosis of "senile" by physicians but the other
seven had no obvious mental deficiency or mental illness.
They had been held in isolation for only two days before
they confessed. Ireland has no Whitmore or Miranda
rulings.
Now, in thinking over these cases, do not forget that girl
in Chicago (I actually knew her) who got classified as a
"slow learner" (academese for mildly retarded) and acted
that way for eight years before she had another test and
suddenly revealed genius-level IQ...
Whether or not the physical universe deserves the label
"observer-created" (as suggested by Dr. Wheeler), much of
the social universe appears "observer-created." (For
further data on this subject, see The Social Creation of Reality
by sociologists Berger and Luckman and How Real Is Real?
by psychologist Paul Watzlavick.)
As anthropologists have long noted, every society gets a
close approximation of the behaviors it expects from men and
women. We have been told over and over again that "you
can't change human nature," but the study of emic realities
shows, quite the contrary, that almost anything can
become "human nature" if society defines it as such.
For instance, the Zuni Indian tribe in the American
southwest has never had a suicide and tribal lore only
recalls one murder, approximately 300 years ago. No
grounds exist to believe the Zunis landed here from
another planet. They appear human. They merely have a
different emic reality than that of White Americans, who
have very high suicide and murder rates, or Swedes, who
have a very low murder rate but a comparatively high
suicide rate.
As noted by Malinowski, the Trobriand Islanders never
had a reported rape until after Christian missionaries
brought them our Occidental reality-tunnel.

130

The Observer Created Universe

Virtually everybody believed in witches in the
Occidental world until about 200 years ago, and also believed the proper treatment for this condition consisted of
charbroiling the suspects. This idea became unfashionable
during the Age of Reason, and 20 years ago nobody would
have expected it to return. In 1990, however, a large percentage of Protestants and several police chiefs believe in a
nationwide "Satanic" underground and, although nobody
has yet gone to the stake, a new witch-hunt obviously has
swept our country.
The Nazis believed the moon consisted of solid ice. Brad
Linaweaver's superb science-fiction novel, Moon of Ice,
concerns a parallel universe where World War II ended in
a truce, rather than total victory for the allies. In Nazi
Europe, the "moon of ice" theory still reigns supreme in
government-run Universities, learned societies, etc. while
in anarchist America (in that universe, we became pacifist,
isolationist and finally anarchist) the orthodox model of
the moon remains dominant. When the Nazis land a
spaceship on the moon and find no ice, all the data of the
flight becomes Top Secret and the Europeans never learn
of it.
Does this plot seem unlikely to you? Look back a few
pages and see what happened to the only two studies of
spontaneous remission written in English.

Exercize
Obtain a copy of High Weirdness by Mail, by Rev. Ivan
Stang, (Simon and Sinister, 1988), a catalog of dissident
groups in the U.S., covering the full spectrum from the
fairly plausible (and possibly important) to those that
appear totally "nutty" to almost all the rest of us. Pick out
five groups that seem sane and plausible, and five that
seem totally crazy, and send for a packet of their literature.
(Stang gives mailing addresses for all groups he reviews.)
Study the literature and discuss in the group.
Do some of the plausible groups look less plausible
when analyzed operationally and skeptically? Do some of

Quantum

Psychology

131

them seem, maybe, as important as a dissident group in
Nazi Europe publishing evidence that the moon doesn't
consist of ice? And — do any of the "nut groups" look less
nutty when you analyze their arguments?

SEVENTEEN
Taking the Mystery Out of "Miracles"
If one society has no rapes, and another has no suicides,
emic reality (brain software) programs etic reality (what
happens to people within an emic reality) more than we
generally realize.
The seriousness of this issue as a philosophical problem
seems immediately evident. Even if "meaningless" technically, the New Age bromide, "You create your own reality" has a kind of connection to the actual facts. Society
seems to create a reality-tunnel, which each member modifies to some extent, and conflict grows out of the delusion
that "I have the one correct reality-tunnel" when " I " have
to deal with somebody who has another "one correct"
reality-tunnel.
The seriousness of this issue as a psychological/sociological factor seems even more staggering than its philosophical implications. We cannot say exactly what would
happen if, e.g., George Bush or Mr. Gorbachev accepted
Buckminster Fuller's claim that we can abolish starvation
by 1995, but something very dramatic and surprising
would undoubtedly happen, something that would alter
our notions of "inevitability."
Since body-changes seem more "miraculous" than social
changes, let us look further into the matter of psychosomatic synergy.
The extent to which the health /illness spectrum deserves
the label "observer-created" and/or "self-fulfilling prophecy" appears strikingly in studies of placebo effectiveness.

132

Quantum

Psychology

133

According to several careful double-blind studies cited
by the invaluable Dr. Rossi (op. cit. pages 15-19):
Placebos proved 56 per cent as effective as morphine in
six double-blind studies;
Placebos proved 54 per cent as effective as aspirin in nine
double-blind studies;
Placebos proved 56 per cent as effective as codeine in
three double-blind studies.
("Effectiveness" rating in these studies indicates how
much relief from pain the patient reported.)
In other words, slightly more than half the time a patient
obtains as much benefit from the belief that she or he
received a pain-killer as they would obtain from actually
receiving a pain-killer.
As O'Regan points out, op. cit. we now have reason to
believe that almost all medical treatment throughout
almost all history worked on placebo principles. In other
words, modern biochemistry indicates that before the
discovery of antibiotics, (i.e., before the 1930s) virtually all
the medicines used by doctors had no actual effectiveness.
The patients got better, when they did, because the doctors
believed in their useless potions and the patients acquired
the "faith" from the doctors.
This last paragraph has more than historical interest.
According to the Office of Technology Assessment, only 20
percent of established medical procedure in the U.S. today has
been validated in rigorous randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled studies. Thus, 80 percent of what our doctors do
rests simply on precedent and high hopes. Since more than
20 percent of us survive American medicine, a great many
placebo cures must still occur daily, as they did before the
1930s.
My own books, especially Prometheus Rising, give
numerous examples of how optimism (a "Winner Script"
in the language of Transactional Analysis) can resolve
psychological and social problems that seem incurable to
1

1

Los Angeles Weekly, Sept. 16-22, 1988. Article, "Blinded by
Science?" by Carolyn Reuben.

134

The Observer Created Universe

those obsessed by pessimism (a "Loser Script" in T.A.) But
most people in our society — and even some scientists —
still feel that something "miraculous" has occurred if a
Winner Script can conquer not just negative feelings and
bad social adjustment but physical cancers and other "nononsense" body diseases, or if a Loser Script can cause a
person to lie down and die like the victims of "death
bones".
As I have already indicated, this sense of "miracle" and
"mystery" derives from our traditional dichotomy of
"mind" and "body" and our habit of thinking that anything we have split verbally must reflect a similar Iron
Curtain in the non-verbal existential world. (Similarly,
physicists, having traditionally split "space" and "time"
found themselves confronted by terrible mysteries and
confusions at the end of the 19th century when this map
clearly no longer fit the territory. It took the genius of
Einstein to re-unify verbally what had always remained
unified non-verbally: he gave up "space" and "time" and
wrote of space-time, and the mysteries quickly found
solutions.)
As suggested earlier, the mystery of "mind" and "body"
begins to disappear if we speak and think without this
dichotomy, in terms of the organism-as-a-whole. To quote
Bowers:
The tendency to split etiological factors of disease into
psychic or somatic components, though heuristic for many
purposes, nevertheless perpetuates, at least implicitly, a
mind-body dualism that has defied rational solution for
centuries. Perhaps what we need is a new formulation of
this ancient problem, one that does not propose a
formidable gap between the separate "realities" of mind
and body...
If information processing and transmission is common
to both psyche and soma, the mind-body problem might
be reformulated as follows: How is information, received
and processed at a semantic level, transduced into information that can be received and processed at a somatic
level, and vice-versa? That sounds like a question that can

Quantum Psychology

135

be more sensibly addressed than the one it is meant to
replace.
1

Transduction, in Information Theory, designates the
translation of form from one information system to
another. For instance, if I speak to you on the phone, the
transmitter transduces my words (sound waves) into electrical charges which — if the phone company does not
screw up again — travel to the receiver in your hand,
where they become transduced again, back into sound
waves, which you decode as words.
Similarly, as I sit here at my MacPlus, the keys I hit look
like letters of the English alphabet but hitting the keys
creates binary (on-off) signals stored in computer memory.
The words have become transduced into electrical charges.
When I print this up — if the computer does not screw up
again — these electrical charges will become transduced
once more, into words that you can read.
The "mind-body problem" has "defied rational solution," I suggest, because any question asked within that
framework qualifies as totally "meaningless" in the
Copenhagen and logical positivist sense. However, if we
drop "mind and body" from our vocabulary and replace
them with "psychosomatic unity" or "psychosomatic
synergy" — as physicists after Einstein dropped "space"
and "time" and replaced them with "space-time" — we
begin to approach an area where meaningful questions
and answers can appear. But this requires, as Bowers
suggested, formulations in terms of Information Theory
and transduction.
A strong set of negative beliefs (a Loser Script) appears,
to neuroscience, as an imprinted and/or conditioned and/
or learned network of bio-chemical reflexes in the cortex of
the brain. Since communication exists between parts of the
brain, and between the brain and other body systems,
these "negative beliefs" can easily transduce into biochemical reflexes of the organism-as-a-whole. Specifically,
1

K. Bowers, "Hypnosis: An Informational Approach," Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences, 296, 222-237 (1977)

136

The Observer Created Universe

the "belief" reflexes in the cortex get transduced into
neurochemical and hormonal processes when they pass
through the hypothalamus, an ancient little part of the
back brain which regulates and / o r influences many body
programs, including the immune system.
Among the chemical systems regulated by the hypothalamus and transduced to the immune system we find a
variety of neuropeptides, including the now-famous endorphins, which act as tranquilizers and pain-killers quite
similar to opium.
Neuropeptides have a curious duality about them which
reminds me of the photons (and electrons) of quantum
mechanics. Those quantum entities (or models?), you
remember by now, sometimes act as waves and sometimes
as particles. Similarly, neuropeptides sometimes act as
hormones (chemicals causing changes in body function)
and sometimes as neurotransmitters (chemicals causing
changes in brain function).
None of these little blighters ever heard of Aristotelian
logic, I guess.
Acting as neurotransmitters in the brain, neuropeptides
perform many interesting known functions (and probably
many not yet known...) Most significantly, they allow the
opening and perhaps the imprinting of new neural pathways and "networks" and/or "reflexes". This means that a
heavy dose of new neuropeptides in your brain, just like a
dose of LSD or some other psychedelic, will cause you to
perceive and "think" (organize and interpret perceptions)
in new and original ways — to drop your familiar gloss
and "see" through other glosses...to leave your rigid
reality-tunnel and enter a multi-choice reality-labyrinth...
to transcend modeltheism (dogma) and spontaneously feelthink in the manner of the "model agnosticism" of postCopenhagen physics...
Whatever metaphor from the behavioral sciences one
uses, the process means, in ordinary terms, decreased
rigidity, increased creativity; less compulsion, more sense
of choice.

Quantum

Psychology

137

In terms of Information Theory, this appears as a
dramatic increase in the amount of information processed
per second. The more new circuits opened in the brain, the
more new information you notice in even the simplest and
most familiar objects or events. To quote Blake, "The fool
sees not the same tree that the wise man sees."
A really massive rush of neuropeptides, then, will subjectively appear as "rebirth" or "seeing a whole new
universe" or a transcendence of what had seemed ineluctable limitations. Many will describe this in religious
metaphors and say "the Spirit overcame me," etc. Blake
speaks of seeing "infinity in a grain of sand."
When they leave the brain and begin acting as hormones
in the body, neuropeptides interact with all significant
systems, including the immunological system. Increased
neuropeptide activity, therefore, correlates with increased
"resistance" to disease, an inner sense of "feeling better"
and the kind of upsurge of hope that propelled Mr. Wright
out of bed and set him walking about the wards chatting
happily with everybody.
A few miscellaneous observations — taken, like most of
the above, from Rossi, op. cit. — will illustrate these synergetic relationships somewhat further.
1. Those who respond best to placebos also register high
on awareness of synchronicities. Since synchronicity only
"makes sense" in a holistic or synergetic model of the
universe (and appears "nonsensical" or "impossible" in a
mechanistic model) such people already have an intuitive
sense of holism, which makes it easier for them to "allow"
holistic processes to occur in brain/body systems.
2. Those who respond least to placebos not only deny
synchronicity but appear "rigid and stereotypical" in their
thinking. Thus, placebos would probably not work for
members of CSICOP. It almost appears that some people
would rather die than allow a cure that looks to them like
magic .
3. Memory now appears mood-dependent. When we feel
happy, we sincerely remember our lives as generally
happy; when we feel said, we conversely remember our

i8
3

The Observer Created Universe

lives as total disasters, etc. The "observer" who creates our
experienced universes not only appears unaware of its
own creativity, but re-edits everything in terms of current
mood (i.e., current neurochemical activity in the brain).
4. Many studies indicate that the neuropeptide activity in
the brain — reassociating, or re-glossing, or moving from a
rigid reality-tunnel to a multi-choice reality labyrinth —
seems as important in healing as the chemical boost that
neuropeptides give to the immune system. In other words,
as our ability to process more and more information
increases, our resistance to unwellness (in general) also
increases.
A world of many options never "feels" as dreadful as a
deterministic or mechanical world.
5. The brain never "remembers" like a tape recorder or
repeats like a parrot. Even the most rigid and compulsive types
(Catholics, Marxists, members of CSICOP, etc.) do a lot more
re-associating, re-framing and creative editing than they
consciously realize.
Dr. Rossi summarizes the current evidence by saying
bluntly that what judges tell witnesses to do in a courtroom — tell one version of experience, and stick to it,
without re-editing — seems unnatural and nearly impossible for the human brain. It seems we never do that,
exactly.
At best, we may convince ourselves and others that we
have done it, for a short period. The attorney for the opposition can usually tear that charade apart — to the utter
consternation of witnesses who have never heard of
Transactional psychology or quantum logic and still believe in the Aristotelian/medieval "one objective reality."
6. Beta wave activity in the brain correlates with outerdirected activity and dominance of sympathetic nervous
system functions. Alpha wave activity, and lower brain
frequencies, correlate with inner-directed passivity and
dominance of parasympathetic nervous system functions.
Daily practice of yoga, which often correlates with
improved health, decreases the total amount of beta

Quantum

Psychology

139

activity/outer directed attention/sympathetic nervous
system function and conversely increases alpha or theta
wave activity/inner directed attention/parasympathetic
nervous system functions.
Hypnosis, whatever positive suggestions it may implant
in the cortex to transduce into neurochemical immunological boosts, also begins with telling the patient to close her
or his eyes and become more relaxed. Both closing the eyes
and relaxing move the patient from beta waves/outer
attention/sympathetic system to alpha-theta waves/inner
attention/parasympathetic system.
(The controversial Dr. Reich, incidentally, used muscular
relaxation techniques to move patients from sympathetic
nervous system dominance to increased parasympathetic
nervous system activity. But since Certified Government
Bureaucrats condemned his ideas and burned his books,
you all know he "was really" a nut, right?)
7. Since the neuropeptides travel through virtually all the
body fluids (blood, lymph, cerebrospinal fluid etc.) as well
as between neurons, the neuropeptide system acts more
slowly but more holistically than the central nervous
system.
The experimental attitude differs totally from "common
sense" — the former accepts that we may, at any time,
discover new information that will profoundly alter our
model of the universe, while the latter assumes we know
the basic truth already and, at worst, will only have to
modify it slightly when new data appears. Thus, I do not
mind confessing that I have tried faith healers on occasion,
experimentally. I have enough conservatism (or cowardice)
to have tried these experiments only with minor ailments
that did not seem likely to become serious hazards to my
survival.
The results exactly conformed to point 7 above, even
though I knew nothing about neuropeptide activity until a
few years ago. With each "healer", I felt nothing very
dramatic during the treatment, and each time I left with a
sense of disappointment and increased skepticism (about
that school of faith healing, or that healer). In a few hours, I

140

The Observer Created Universe

began to notice a slight decrease in symptoms and a
upsurge in "new energy." Within a day, all symptoms
disappeared and my health again appeared normal. I did
not know how to explain this effect until I read about the
slow-motion holistic activity of neuropeptides.
Perhaps, even after these neurochemical functions seem
clear to the reader, an aura of "spookiness" still lingers
about the whole subject. Let us look at the belief/neuropeptide/immunological loop in slow motion, then. This
will perhaps appear less "spooky."
According to Brain/Mind Bulletin (May 1988) John Barefoot of Duke University has found a negative correlation
between suspiciousness and longevity. In a sample of 500
older men and women whose health he monitored for 15
years, Barefoot discovered that:
(a) those who scored high on suspiciousness, cynicism
and hostility died sooner than all others;
(b) this high mortality among those with Loser Scripts
remained constant when compared by age, by sex, by
previous health, by diet and even by "bad habits." (Those
who smoked and remained generally optimistic lived
longer than those who smoked and worried about it.)
(c) those who scored highest on hostility had a death rate
more than six times higher than others.
In a related study (Brain/Mind Bulletin August 1988)
Shelley Taylor of UCLA and Jonathan Brown of SMU
refuted the conventional idea that those who score high on
"mental health" have fewer illusions than others.
Quite the reverse, according to this study: those who
score high on "mental health" generally have a number of
illusory beliefs. Among the most common illusions of the
mentally healthy:
(a) overly positive views of themselves;
(b) convenient "forgetting" of negative facts about
themselves;
(c) illusory beliefs about having more control than they
do have;
(d) "unrealistic" optimism about themselves;

Quantum

Psychology

141

(e) "unrealistic" optimism about the future in general;
(f) "abnormal" cheerfulness.
Would you want to have those kinds of "illusions" or
would you rather stick to "hard realism" and die sooner
than those deluded fools?
In closing this chapter, I would like to give another case
history and a bit of self-revelation. At the age of 2 years, in
1934, I contracted polio — a rather widespread disease
among children up until the Salk vaccine. Dr. Salk had not
discovered the vaccine yet, in 1934, and the medical
prognosis held that I would never walk again.
My parents eventually found a doctor who had decided
to experimentally treat some polio patients with the
"Heretical" methods of Sister Kenny, an Australian nurse
who had been roundly Damned and Anathematized by the
A.M.A. bureaucracy. On all sides, Americans received the
message that the Sister Kenny methods did not work and
that they consisted of "quackery" and "witchcraft."
The Kenny system consisted of (a) something a bit like
faith healing, (b) muscle massage and (c) long soaking in
hot tubs.
The "faith healing" side of Sister Kenny's technique
involved flat denial of the A.M.A. dogma that those crippled by polio could never walk again. The muscle massage
had a lot in common with the techniques of the infamous
Dr. Reich, Damned and Anathematized in the 1950s by the
same medical bureaucracy that condemned Sister Kenny in
the 1930s. The hot tub idea had been popular in the 19th
Century, remained popular in Europe and has become
popular again in California. I have no idea whether my
cure resulted from one of these factors, from two, or from
all three in synergy. Empirically, I recovered and started
walking again. I walk normally today, with only an
occasional limp when very tired, and some pedal
myoclonism at night. Most people do not guess that I spent
two years as a cripple.
Those treated by orthodox A.M.A. methods in those
years seem to have remained in wheel-chairs for the rest of
their lives.

The Observer Created Universe
In retrospect, I wonder how much of the condemnation
of Sister Kenny resulted from the facts that she did not
possess male genitalia or a medical degree (i.e., in the
minds of most physicians, she "was" "only" a woman and
"only" a nurse...)
I suspect that some long-term effects of the Sister Kenny
treatment linger with me. E.g., I have enjoyed better-thanaverage health for the rest of my life, I retain a deep suspicion of all "Authorities" and Authoritarians (as you might
have noticed), and I have never had the fashionable
pessimism and bon ton despair necessary to get myself
included among Serious Novelists in the judgment of New
York critics. Like the people in the Taylor-Brown study, I
seem "unrealistically" optimistic about myself and the
future and "abnormally" cheerful. This annoys quite a few
people.

Exercizes
1. Buy one of the hypno-tapes on how to build self-confidence and increase self-healing now widely advertised. (I
especially recommend those available from Acoustic Brain
Research, 640 Ocean View Drive, Friday Harbor, WA
98250, U.S.A.) Play this tape at every weekly group
meeting. Observe any changes in the behavior and/or the
general health of the members of the group.
2. Rewrite the following sentences in E-Prime:
A. Dr. Reich was a quack.
B. Sister Kenny was a quack.
C. "Everybody is a bit queer except me and thee, and
sometimes I wonder about thee."
D. Cancer is caused by worry and depression.
E. Cancer is caused by a virus.
F. The cause of schizophrenia is sexual repression.
G. Schizophrenia is caused by genetic predisposition.
H. She is a Catholic, so therefore she is against abortion.
J. "Evolution is no longer a theory; it is a proven fact."
(Variations on this came forth from several

Quantum Psychology

43

biologists during recent controversies with Bible
Fundamentalists.)
K. "The whole New Age is Satanic." (Rev. Pat
Robertson)
L. "Reality is whatever you think it is."
M. "Nothing is. Nothing becomes. Nothing is not."
(Aleister Crowley, Book of Lies (falsely so called))
N. "Bob is. Bob becomes. Bob is not. Therefore, Bob is
nothing." (Ivan Stang, Book of the Sub-Genius.)
3. Rewrite the following questions in E-Prime.
A. Are all diseases psychosomatic?
B. Are some UFOs really alien spaceships?
C. What is Justice?
D. What is Art?
E. What is the cause of poverty?
F. What is the cause of war?
G. Why are there so many homeless people in this rich
country?
H. "It's pretty, but is it Art?" (Kipling)

PARTFOUR
Schroedinger's Cat & Einstein's Mouse
"Art imitates nature."
— Aristotle
"Nature imitates art."
— Oscar Wilde

You can see the above illustration two different ways. Can
you see it both ways at the same time, or can you only
change your mental focus rapidly and see it first one way
and then the other way, in alteration?
"The true essence of things is a profound illusion."
— F. W. Nietzsche

EIGHTEEN
Multiple Selves & Information Systems
Between 1910 and 1939, Charlie Chaplin always played the
same character in all his films — the beloved little Tramp
that became world-famous. In 1939, Chaplin wrote, directed and starred in The Great Dictator, in which the little
Tramp did not appear. Instead, Chaplin played two characters — a tyrant, based on Hitler, and a Jewish tailor, one of
Hitler's victims. Audiences all over the world (except Germany, where the authorities banned the film) complained,
mournfully and angrily, that they missed the little Tramp.
Chaplin, however, having gotten rid of the Tramp once,
never did bring that persona back. In later films, he played
many characters (a serial killer, a kindly old vaudevillian, a
deposed king), but never the Tramp. People still complained that they wanted to see the Tramp again, but
Chaplin went on creating new characters. (We will leave it
to Jungians to explain why Chaplin had to become two
opposite characters before he could personally escape the
Archetype of the Tramp...)
Many actors have had equally hard battles in getting
detached from, if not a specific character, a specific type.
Humphrey Bogart remained stuck in villain roles, usually
gangsters, for nearly a decade before he got to play his first
hero. Cary Grant never did escape from the hero type —
either the romantic hero or the comic hero; when Alfred
Hitchcock persuaded him to play a murderer, in Suspicion,
the studio over-ruled both of them and tacked on a surprise ending in which the Grant character did not commit
the murder, after all. Etc.
47

148

Cat and Mouse

Back in "the real world," if a member of a family changes
suddenly, the whole family suddenly appears agitated and
disturbed. Family counselors have learned to expect this,
even when the change consists of something everybody
considers desirable — e.g., an alcoholic who suddenly
stops drinking can "destabilize" the family to the extent
that another member becomes clinically depressed, or
develops psychosomatic symptoms, or even starts drinking heavily (as if the family "needed" an alcoholic).
It seems that we not only speak and think in sentences like
"John is an old grouch" but become disoriented and frightened if
John suddenly starts acting friendly and generous. (Audiences
rejected the previously "lovable" Chaplin most vehemently when he played the multiple wife-killer in Monsieur
Verdoux. Probably, audiences would not have felt upset if
the role had gone to the actor who originally wrote it for
himself and sold it to Chaplin when the Hollywood
moguls blacklisted him — Orson Welles.)
If Dickens' Scrooge had changed, in actuality, as he
changed in the book, several people in his social field
would have suddenly developed bizarre behaviors they
had never shown before...
Chaplin, amusingly, once made a comedy about the
chaos created by a man who conspicuously does not
exhibit the "isness" or "essence" our subject-predicate
language programs us to expect, City Lights. In this film,
the little Tramp encounters a millionaire with two entirely
different personalities: a generous and compassionate
drunk, and a greedy, somewhat paranoid sober man. The
Tramp and all the other characters soon exhibit behaviors
that would look like clinical insanity to the audience, if we
did not know the secret none of the characters guess:
namely that each "personality" in the rich man appears
when brain chemistry changes.
The Russian mystic Gurdjieff claimed that we all contain
multiple personalities. Many researchers in psychology
and neuroscience now share that startling view. As
Gurdjieff indicated, the "I" who toils at a job does not seem
the same " I " who makes love with joy and passion, and

Quantum

Psychology

49

the third "I" who occasionally gets angry for no evident
reason seems a third personality, etc. There does not
appear anything metaphysical about this; it even appears,
measurably, on electroencephalograms. Dr. Frank Putnam
of the National Institute of Health found that extreme
cases of multiple personality — the only ones that orthodox psychiatry recognizes — show quite distinct brain
waves for each "personality" almost as if the researchers
had taken the electrodes off of one subject and attached
them to another. (O'Regan. op. cit.)
Dr. Rossi defines these separate personalities as "state
specific information systems." Not only do we show different
personalities when drunk and when sober, like Chaplin's
emblematic millionaire, but we have different information
banks ("memories") in these states. Thus, most people
have noted that something that happened to them while
drunk appears totally forgotten, until they get intoxicated
again, and then the memory "miraculously" re-appears.
This observation of state-specific information occurs even
more frequently with LSD; nobody really remembers the
richness of an LSD voyage until they take another dose.
Emotional states seem part of a circular-causal loop with brain
chemistry — it seems impossible, for science in 1990, to say that
one part of the circle "causes" the other parts. Thus, we can
now understand a phenomenon mentioned earlier, namely
that we tend to remember happy experiences when happy
and sad experiences when sad.
The separate "personalities" or information systems
within a typical human seem to fall into four main groups,
with four additional groups appearing only in minorities
who have engaged in one form or another of neurological
self-research (metaprogramming).
1. The Oral Bio-Survival System. This seems to contain
imprints and conditioning dating from early infancy, with
subsequent learning built upon that foundation.
If you stop and think about, you know how a carpet
tastes, how the leg of a chair tastes, etc. You may even
remember how the dirt in a flower pot tastes. This knowledge dates from the oral stage of infancy in which we take

150

Cat and Mouse

nourishment (bio-survival) through the mother's nipples
and also judge other objects by putting them in our
mouths. A large part of parenting an infant consists in
following the little darling around and shouting "Don't
put that in your mouth" whenever they try to taste /test
something toxic.
Dating from Adorno in the 1940s, psychologists who do
surveys on large groups (e.g., entering college freshpersons) have repeatedly noted a correlation between dislike
of "foreign" and "exotic" foods and the "fascist" personality. A total Gestalt seems to exist — a behavioral/conceptual cluster of dislike of new food-dislike of "radical"
ideas/racism/nationalism/sexism/xenophobia/conservatism/phobic and/or compulsive behaviors-fascist ideologies. This cluster makes up the well-known F-Scale (F for
Fascism). Where more than two of these traits appear, the
probabilities indicate that most of the others will appear.
This seems to result from a neophobic imprint in the biosurvival system. Those with this imprint feel increasingly
insecure as they move in space-time away from Mommy
and "home-cooked meals." Conversely, those who like to
experiment with strange and exotic foods seem to have a
neophilic imprint and want to explore the world in many
dimensions — traveling, moving from one city or country
to another, studying new subjects, "playing" with ideas
rather than holding rigidly to one static model of the
universe.
On this baby-level of the brain, some seem to have an
imprint that clings to the familiar ("Oh, Mommy, take me
home"), some have the opposite imprint that seeks novelty
and exploration ("Let's see what's on the other side of the
mountain") and most, following the Bell-shaped curve,
have an imprint somewhere between these extremes —
"conservative" on some issues, innovative on others.
Subsequent learning will tend to get processed through
these imprints, and those with strong neophobic reflexes
will usually, if they ever reject the initial dogmatic family
reality-tunnel, settle at once into an equally dogmatic new
reality-tunnel. E.g., if raised Catholic, they seldom become

Quantum

Psychology

151

agnostics or zetetics; rather, they will move, like iron
filings drawn by a magnet, to dogmatic atheism or even a
crusading atheist "religion" like Marxism, Objectivism or
CSICOP.
Since the mechanical bio-chemical reflexes on this level
remain "invisible" (and cannot even reach translation onto
the verbal level except in an altered state of consciousness,
such as hypnosis, or under certain drugs), this hard-wired
infantile information system controls all later information
systems (or "selves") without the knowledge of the
conscious ego.
In most cases, the "happiest" or most tranquil areas of
the infantile bio-survival system — those imprinted by the
Safe Space around Mommy — can only be "remembered"
or re-experienced with drugs that trigger neurotransmitters similar to those activated during breast-feeding. The
attempt to re-capture that state may lead to re-imprinting
via yoga or martial arts, or to a search for chemical
analogs, which will eventually lead to the opiates.
"Disturbed" or "unhappy" (ego dystonic) imprints here
may account for opiate addictions.
This oral bio-survival system makes a feedback loop
from mouth to hypothalamus to neuropeptide system to
lymph and blood etc. to immunological system. What
Transactional Analysis calls the Wooden Leg Game —
evasion of adult responsibility through chronic illness —
does not appear conscious in most cases. Rather a Loser
Script in this system depresses the sub-systems, including
the immunological system, and renders the subject, or
victim, statistically prone to more illness than average.
Similarly, a Winner Script on this circuit contributes to
longevity and may account for cases like Bertrand Russell
(still writing philosophy and polemic at 99), George Burns
(busy with three careers until 100) etc.
2. The Anal Territorial System. Since all mammals mark
their territories with excretions, the "toddler" stage of
development and associated toilet training produces a
system of synergetic imprints and conditioning concerned

152

Cat and Mouse

with territory and what Freudians call "anality"
(sadomasochism).
Those who take a Dominant imprint in this system seek
power all their lives; those with a Submissive imprint seek
Dominant types to lead them (the Reichian Fuhrerprinzip)
and most people settle somewhere between these
extremes, taking a masochist stance toward those "above"
them (government, landlords etc.) and a sadist stance
toward selected victims defined as "below" them (wives,
children, "inferior races," people on Welfare, etc.)
The "self" or information system on this toddler level
may function as the predominant self or "normal"
personality in those whose lives center around power or it
may remain "latent" usually and only emerge in conflict
situations. Usually, it emerges full-blown when enough
alcohol enters the brain and alters habitual circuitry. The
anal-sadist vocabulary of the typical drunk ("Oh, yeah?
Stick it up your ass," "You dumb ass-hole," "Up yours,
buddy," etc.) recapitulates toilet training and mammalian
habits of using excretions as territorial fight-or-flight
signals.
People say later "He was acting like a two-year-old" or
more simply "He just wasn't himself last night." These
remarks signify that the toddler information system — i.e.,
the mammalian anal-territorial circuits — temporarily took
control of the brain.
Politicians have great skill in activating this system and
easily persuade large crowds to behave like small children
having temper tantrums. The favorite activating device
(dramatized by Shakespeare in Henry V) invokes
mammalian pack-solidarity by attacking a rival pack. George
Bush, perceived as a "wimp" by many, raised his popularity to unprecedented heights, just as I looked about for a
contemporary illustration of this point. Mr. Bush simply
invaded a small, Third World country (Panama) where a
quick, easy victory came within a week. The "wimp"
image vanished overnight. Any alpha male in any gorilla
or chimpanzee pack, feeling his authority slipping, would
have followed the same course.

Quantum

Psychology

153

This system makes a feedback loop between muscles,
adrenaline, the thalamus of the brain, the anus and the
larynx. Swelling the body and using the larynx to howl
(muscle-flexing and noise) makes up the usual Domination
signal among birds, reptiles, mammals and politicians.
Study the speeches of Hitler and Ronald Reagan for
further details, or just watch two ducks disputing territory
in a pond.
Conversely, shrinking the body and muttering (or
becoming totally silent) make up the usual Submission
reflex. "Crawling away with its tail between its legs," the
dog's submission reflex, does not differ much from the
body-language of an employee who made the mistake of
disagreeing with the boss and received a Dominator
(flexing/howling) signal in response.
The ego — or self — defined by this system appears
more mammalian and evolutionarily advanced than the
quick reptilian reflexes of the self operating on the oral biosurvival system. Nonetheless, the personality shrinks back
to the primitive bio-survival self whenever real danger
appears — whenever confronted by threat to life, rather
than mere threat to status. This difference between mammalian strategy and reptilian reflex explains why there
seems more "time" in the anal territorial system than in the oral
bio-survival system. In the later, mammalian system, one
explores relative power signals slowly; in the earlier,
reptilian system, one attacks or flees instantly.
3. The Semantic Time-Binding System. After the growing child acquires language — i.e., learns that the flux of
experience has had labels and indexes assigned to it by the
tribal game-rules — a new information system becomes
imprinted and conditioned, and this system can continue
growing and learning for a lifetime.
This system allows me to receive signals sent 2500 years
ago by persons such as Socrates and Confucius. It allows
me to send signals which, if I have more luck than most
writers, will still find their way to new receivers 2500 years
in the future. This time-binding function of symbolism
gives humans problem-solving capacities impossible to

154

Cat and Mouse

most other animals (except, perhaps, cetaceans) and also
allows us to create and suffer from "problems" that do not
exist at all, except on the linguistic level.
With human symbolism we can produce (or learn from
their producers) mathematical systems that allow us to
predict the behavior of physical systems long before we
had the instruments to measure those systems (as Einstein
predicted that clocks in outer space would measure time
differently than clocks on our planet face). We can even
build complex machines that work — most of the time.
With symbolism we can also write messages so profound
that nobody fully understands them but almost everybody
agrees they say something important (e.g., Beethoven's
Ninth Symphony).
And with symbolism we can create meaningless metaphysics and Strange Loops so weird that society grows
alarmed and either locks us up or insists on "medicating"
us. With such weird symbols, if not locked up or medicated, we can even persuade multitudes to believe in our
gibberish and execute 6,000,000 scapegoats (the Hitler
case), line up to drink cyanide cocktails (the Jim Jones
case), or perform virtually any idiocy or lunacy imaginable.
If the imprints in the first two information systems
differentiate us into large groups — conservatives and
pioneers, dominators and followers, etc. — the semantic
system allows us to differentiate ourselves still further,
giving humanity more tribal eccentrics, both benevolent
and malign, than any other class of animals.
We do not all live in the same universe. Millions live in a
Moslem universe and find it very hard to understand
persons living in a Christian universe. Millions of others
live in a Marxist universe. Most Americans seem quite
happy in a mixed 19th Century Capitalist and 13th
Century Christian universe, but the literary intelligentsia
lives in an early 20th Century Freudian/Marxist universe,
and a few well-informed scientists evidently actually live
in a 1997 universe. Etc.

Quantum

Psychology

*55

The elaboration of such emic realities or reality-tunnels
can reach extremes of creativity, in which a person
"invents" a totally new and individualized gloss on the
whole of existence. Such great creators will either win
Nobel prizes (for art or science) or will get thrown in
"mental hospitals," depending on how much skill they
have at selling their new vision to others. Some will even
get locked up in nut-houses and later become recognized
as great scientific pioneers — e.g., Semmelweiss, the first
physician to suggest that surgeons should wash their
hands before operating.
(Ezra Pound had the peculiar distinction of winning an
award from the Library of Congress for writing the best
poem of the year, in 1948, while government psychiatrists
insisted he "was" insane.)
The semantic time-binding system makes a feedback
loop between the verbal left brain hemisphere, the larynx,
the right hand (which manipulates the world and checks
the accuracy of maps or glosses) and the eyes (which read
words and also scan the environment).
The self existing in this system has more "time" than the self
on the mammalian territorial system or the reptilian survival
system. Indeed, it can speculate about "time", or about
other words, and invent philosophies about timeless
universes, three-dimensional time (Ouspensky), infinite
time dimensions (Dunne) etc. It can invent new Gestalts
which make quantum jumps in our social information
banks and it can wallow in utter nonsense endlessly.
A "clever" imprint in this system usually lasts for life, as
does a "dumb" imprint. Subsequent conditioning and
learning all occur with the parameters of a fluent (wellspoken, clear-thinking) self or a dull (inarticulate,
"unthinking") self.
4. T h e Socio-Sexual System. At puberty, the DNA unleashes messenger RNA molecules which notify all subsystems that mating time has arrived. The body metamorphizes totally, and the nervous system ("mind") changes in
the process. A new "self" appears.

15б

Cat and Mouse

As usual, imprinting and genetics play a major role, with
conditioning and learning modifying but seldom radically
altering genetic-imprinted imperatives. If the environment
provides a sex-positive imprint, adult sexuality will have a
joyous and even "transcendental" quality;, if the environ­
ment provides a sex-negative imprint, sexuality will
remain disturbed or problematical for life.
The socio-sexual system feedbacks run from front brain
through hormonal and neuropeptide systems to genitalia
to breasts and arms (hugging, cuddling, fucking circuitry).
A " g o o d " sexual imprint creates the archetypal "bright
eyes and bushy tails," while a " b a d " imprint creates a
tense (muscularly armored) and zombie-like appearance.
The self or ego in this system easily learns adult Game
Rules (civilized norms, "ethics"), if the sexual imprint has
not had strong negative components. Where the imprint
does have negative or "kinky" components, adult Game
Rules do not set in place and either an "outlaw" personal­
ity crystallizes (the rapist/criminal with the archetypal
"Born to L o s e " tattoo) or else the Jekyll-Hyde dualism
appears, well illustrated recently by several sex-negative
TV preachers who got caught in some very kinky private
sex-games.
Whatever system dominates at a given time appears as
the ego or self at that time, in two senses:
1. People who meet Mr. A when he has the Oral
Submissive self predominant, will remember him as "that
sort of person." People who meet him when he has the
Semantic/rational self predominant remember him as
another sort of person. Etc.
2. Due to state-specific information, as discussed earlier,
when you have one of these selves predominant, you
"forget" the other selves to a surprising extent and act as if
the brain only had access to the information banks of the
presently predominant self. E.g., when frightened into
infantile Oral states, you may actually think "I am always a
weakling," quite forgetting the times when your Anal
Dominator self was in charge, or the Semantic or Sexual
imprints were governing the brain, etc.

Quantum

Psychology

157

(This analysis owes a great deal to Dr. Timothy Leary's
Info-Psychology, Falcon Press, 1988. A discussion at greater
length, less technical than Leary's, appears in my
Prometheus Rising, op. cit.)
But, if we have a variety of potential selves rather than
the one block-like "essential self" of Aristotelian philosophy, and, if each self acts as an observer who creates a
reality-tunnel which appears as a whole universe (to those
unaware of Transactional and Quantum psychology), then:
Each time an internal or external trigger causes us to quantum
jump from one "self" to another, the whole world around us
appears to change also.
This explains why Mary may say, and honestly believe,
"Everybody bullies m e " one day and then say, and
honestly believe, "Everybody likes me and helps me" on
another day, why John may feel "Everybody is a bastard"
one hour and "I feel sorry for everybody; they're all suffering" the next hour.
Every person lives in different umwelt (emic reality) but
every self within a person also lives in a different realitytunnel.
The number of universes perceived by human beings
does not equal the population of the planet, but several
times the population of the planet. It thus appears some
sort of miracle that we sometimes find it possible to
communicate with each other at all, at all.
Quantum mechanics says an electron has a different
"essence" every time we measure it (or, more clearly, it has
no "essence" at all). Neuroscience reveals, similarly, that
the Mary we meet on Tuesday may have a different "self"
than the Mary we met Monday (or, as the Buddhists said
long before neuroscience, Mary has no "essence" at all).
As we said at the beginning, the bedrock claim of
existentialism holds that "existence precedes essence," or
we have no "essence". Like electrons, we jump from one
information system to another, and only those who have
not looked closely believe that one "essence" remains
constant through all transformations.

i8

Cat and Mouse

5

Exercizes
1. J. Edgar Hoover, head of our secret police for over 50
years, now appears to have lived the life of an active
homosexual. He kept files on the sexual behavior of politicians, business people, famous actors and anybody who
could advance or harm his career, and used these files for
blackmail.
Try to figure out Mr. Hoover's imprinted and conditioned selves, according to the above analysis.
2. Try the same on Jesus Christ.
3. Try Thomas Jefferson.
4. Let each member of the study group pick some subject,
or victim — not part of the group, but someone the
member sees daily. Let the member study that person carefully and analyze which selves appear most often, how
frequently the selves shift, and which self (if any) appears
dominant most of the time.
5. This exercize will seem the hardest in the book, but try
it anyway. Observe yourself for a week, and try to see
which selves appear most often, if one self appears dominant, etc.

NINETEEN
Multiple Universes

The quantum theory of observer-created universes has
implications far weirder than we have discussed thus far.
Some physicists do not agree with the Copenhagen
Interpretation. They believe that we can make statements
about a "deep reality". Unfortunately, the statements they
make usually sound like either science-fiction or Oriental
mysticism.
We will consider the "science fiction" flavors of quantum
theory first. These began, in 1935, when Nobel laureate
Erwin Schroedinger posed the problem we have already
mentioned several times — the case of the cat which
occupies the categories of life and death simultaneously.
Since quantum "laws" do not have the absolute nature of
Newtonian (or Aristotelian) laws, all quantum theory must
use probabilities. As we said earlier, the Aristotelian "yes"
or 0 per cent and "no" or 100 per cent represent the
certitude Occidentals have traditionally sought. Quantum
experiments refuse to yield such certitude, and we find
ourselves always with some probability between 0% and
100% — maybe 24%, maybe 5 1 % , maybe 75%.. .etc.
In many cases we actually find a 50% probability, just as
if we had flipped a coin and the chance of its landing
heads = the chance of its landing tails = 50%. Schroedinger
considers the case of a quantum decay process in which at
any point in time, t, the chance of one possible outcome =
the chance of another possible outcome = 50%. For convenience, let us make t, our time = 10 minutes. We can now
say that after ten minutes the chance of outcome A and
159

i6o

Cat and Mouse

outcome В both equal 50%, but we cannot say which
outcome will occur until the 10 minutes pass and we make
a measurement.
Now, Schroedinger says, imagine a poison gas pellet
which will explode in the case of outcome A but will not
explode in the case of outcome B. Obviously, at the end of
10 minutes, the chance of an exploded pellet = the chance
of an unexploded pellet = 50%.
Now put the pellet in a box with a cat, and lock the door.
Until the moment you open the door to see what happened, the
chance of the exploded pellet still = the chance of an unex­
ploded pellet = 50%. Therefore, the chance of a live cat =
the chance of a dead cat = 50%.
In Aristotelian language the cat "is" both dead and alive
until we open the door.
Reformulating in operational language, as we have done,
saves us from that absurdity, but does not entirely solve
our problem here. The model that contains a dead cat has
the probability of the model that contains a live cat and
both still equal 50%. We seem to have escaped from the
more bizarre metaphysical interpretations of the Schroe­
dinger's cat problem, but we still have a mystery on our
hands. Classical physics could predict exact results even
before we looked, but quantum physics can only predict
probabilities until we look.
Good grounds for sticking to the Copenhagen Interpre­
tation, you might say. I tend to agree.
But Einstein and others did not like the Copenhagen
view and kept insisting that eventually we would find a
way to make statements about "reality", even in the
quantum realm. Schroedinger's Cat made severe problems
for them.
In 1952, Hugh Everett of Princeton, in collaboration with
Wheeler and Graham, proposed a theory which attempts
to describe "reality" and includes an answer to the Cat
mystery.
In technical language, the probability wave that
describes the possible outcomes of a quantum process has
a mathematical name — the state vector. In the Cat prob-

Quantum

Psychology

161

lem, the state vector, as defined, can "collapse" two ways,
one yielding a dead cat and the other yielding a live cat.
Von Neumann would say that, until we open the door,
the state vector has the three values of dead cat, live cat
and maybe. This means the state vector can collapse two
ways and we remain in "maybe" until we actually see how
it collapses in a given case.
Everett, Wheeler and Graham offer a different model,
now abbreviated the EWG model, after their initials.
In this model, the state vector never "collapses." Each
possible outcome does occur, in different eigenstates
(roughly, probability manifolds). Since these eigenstates
must exist somewhere, and cannot co-exist in the same
space-time, they exist in different universes.
Thus, in super-space — a concept invented by Wheeler
to solve quite different problems (mathematical formulations of gravity in Einstein's universe) — our universe
does not exist alone. Other universes also exist — an
unknown number of them — in the same super-space that
contains Einstein's four-dimensional universe. In one
universe, the eigenstate at the end of the poison pellet case
contains a dead cat. In another universe, the eigenstate
contains a live cat.
And this happens every time a 50% probability occurs.
The state vector "splits" into two vectors in two universes.
Thus, this theory literally means that somewhere in
super-space, a universe exists with an Earth just like this
one, except that Adolph Hitler, over there, never went into
politics and remained a painter, but Van Gogh, after his
brain had collapsed from paresis, did enter politics and
emerged as a Great Dictator.
If you depart from physics for a moment and get philosophical, or morbid, about this, you might ask why we had
the bad luck to land in this universe instead of that one.
The answer, in the EWG model, says that "we" exist in that
other universe, too — or something like Xerox copies of us
exist over there.
Well, I warned you this would sound like science-fiction.

Cat and Mouse

162

Somewhere in super-space exists a universe in which
Earth revolves around the sun just as it does here, but life
never appeared on that Earth — and nobody like Everett,
Wheeler and Graham ever evolved to suggest that other
Earths existed, including one where our Everett, Wheeler
and Graham dreamed up this idea.
Somewhere in super-space exists a universe in which a
Xerox copy of me sits writing this paragraph and offers as
an example, "Somewhere in super-space exists a universe
where Beethoven died comparatively young, so they have
the First to Fourteenth symphonies, but never heard the
glorious Fifteenth."
Somewhere in super-space exists a universe in which
another Xerox copy of me sits writing, "Somewhere in
super-space exists a universe where Beethoven died very
young, so they have the First to Fourth symphonies but not
the glorious Fifth."
And so on...but not to infinity. Nobody has calculated
the precise number of parallel universes that should exist,
according to this model, but since all possible universes
have to emerge from the same Big Bang (within the terms
of this model) the number seems very large, but not
infinitely large. Dr. Bryce de Witt in Physics Today, 1970,
estimated it as larger than 1 0
but did not attempt to
guess how much larger.
Still, that's large enough for any science-fiction plot you
care to imagine.
In one universe, presumably, I felt compelled to write a
book much like this one, but due to different imprints and
learning experiences, I rejected the Copenhagen view and
the whole book consisted of an argument that the multipleuniverse theory makes more sense than any other interpretation of quantum mechanics.
In one universe, whatever you think of this theory here,
you think the opposite over there.
The major argument for the EWG model lies in its
alleged economy. You may find this startling. Occam's
razor, as every school child once knew — back in the
reactionary days when schoolchildren had to know
1 0 0

Quantum

Psychology

something — holds that scientifically, we must always
choose the most economical model, the one which includes
the least assumptions or presumptions. Now, on the face
of it, a model which says that more than 1 0 Xerox copies
of you will read an equal number of variations on this text
does not seem very economical. But the EWG advocates
insist that all rival interpretations lead to even less
"economical" conclusions.
The Copenhagen interpretation, for instance, seems
much more economical than EWG — as I have presented
it. However, all too often physicists have presented it, not
in E-Prime but in standard English, including the "is of
identity". When stated with the "is of identity" the Copenhagen
view always seems to say that we literally create the physical
universe by observing it — a position previously espoused
only by Bishop Berkeley, and easily caricatured as solipsism. (As noted, one physicist has even written, "There is
no reality.")
Thus, the EWG crowd claims that Copenhagenism
violates Occam's economy by postulating a universe magically created by human thought. Because of the "is of
identity" some Copenhagenists have actually gone that far.
This led to Einstein's famous sarcasm that every time a
mouse looks at the universe the universe must change; and
Dr. Fred Allan Wolf has solemnly replied that the cells in
the mouse's brain number so few that all the changes
caused by all mouse observations total very, very little
more than 0% and hence we can ignore them.
I think Copenhagenism, as expressed in this book,
without the "is of identity" evades the above criticism. (We
will shortly ponder whether another alternative, hidden
variable theories, can similarly evade the EWG criticism
when restated without the "is of identity".)
However, I will grant that the EWG model does accept the
basic wave equations of quantum mechanics at face value
whereas the EWG and hidden variable models add philosophical interpretations on top of the equations. In that
sense the EWG model may qualify as more economical.
1 0 0

164

Cat and Mouse

You see, the position of this book does not embrace what
I call Fundamentalist Copenhagenism — the view that the
Copenhagen model says the last word forever. Rather, I
consider my position Liberal Copenhagenism. I do not
believe any model equals the universe, or universes, but I
think alternative models will continue to proliferate,
because the data of modern science has grown so complex
that many models will cover it.
Some call this Liberal Copenhagenism "model agnosticism." Dr. Marcello Truzzi calls it "zeteticism."
The history of the EWG model indicates the extent of
fundamental disagreement among physicists about these
matters and thereby, I think, reinforces the Liberal Copenhagenism or "model agnosticism" to which most physicists have, by now, retreated — the zetetic attitude of this
book. Dr. Wheeler, one of the inventors of EWG, later
rejected it for its "excess metaphysical baggage" but more
recently he has returned to it again. Dr. Bryce de Witt says
he could not take EWG seriously at first, but has now
become one of its leading advocates. The majority of
physicists still regard it as mathematical surrealism but its
popularity continues to grow among the younger generation. At least a dozen books in the last decade have either
espoused the EWG model overtly, or treated it respectfully — as just as plausible as the dominant Copenhagen
theory.
We now see that, just as current neuroscience denies one
essential self or "soul" of the Aristotelian sort and detects a
variety of selves in every brain, one branch of quantum
theory also sees a variety of selves. In other words, both
brain research and one flavor of quantum mechanics say
many possible selves appear equally "real" — the neurologists find these selves in our brain chemistry and the EWG
theorists find them in other universes, but in both cases the
"one essential self" has vanished as totally as in Buddhist theory.
In neuroscience the predominant self of the moment
appears no more real than the latent selves which might
manifest as soon as I take a drink or a drug, or get frightened, or find myself in an unfamiliar country. In the EWG

Quantum

165

Psychology

model, the self which I manifest in this universe appears
no more real than numerous female selves I have in half of
the possible universes, or the countless alternative male
selves I have in other universes.
One cannot help being struck by the fact that according
to Freudian, Jungian and Gestalt methods of dream interpretation, these alternative selves, some of them bringing
alternative universes with them, manifest every night in
our sleep. Some physicists describe the other universes and
other selves as "virtual", but does that not also describe
our dreams?
And does it not appear that virtual selves and virtual
realities have infiltrated both psychology and physics
because, as this book claims, all sufficiently advanced analysis
must eventually abandon Aristotelian certitude and accept
models — reality tunnels — based on probabilities?

Exercize
Let each member of the study group say aloud "I do this
exercize because..." and then attempt to state "all" the
reasons. For instance, you will do this exercize because you
have entered this class. Why did you enter this class? How
did you get interested in the topics discussed in this book?
How did you find this class? How did you arrive in this
particular city of all the cities on this planet?
Carry the analysis further. How did you happen to be
born? That is, how did your parents come to meet and
mate? How did they come to be born? Amid all the wars,
earthquakes, famines and other disasters of human history
how did those genetic strains which combined in you
survive when so many other genetic strains disappeared?
How did this continent emerge from geological evolution? Can you estimate how many migrations, wars of
conquest, economic upheavals, etc. led to the genetic
strains of your father and mother coming together?
Attempt in at least a rough, vague way to account for the
formation of the planet Earth and the appearance of life on
Earth.

i66

Cat and Mouse

When each member has had a chance at this game
consider the improbability of all of you coming together on this
night, of all the nights of your lives, to do this exercize.
It will probably prove necessary to do this exercize at
least three times before the full meaning sinks into the
neurons.

TWENTY
Star Makers?
Dr. John Archibald Wheeler has a more radical view of the
matter these days than he had back when he co-authored
the EWG model.
But before discussing that, we need to look at "nonlocality."
In 1965, Dr. John S. Bell published a paper which physicists refer to tersely as "Bell's Theorem." Since a great deal
of nonsense has gotten printed about this — and I wrote
some nonsense myself in an early book called Cosmic
Trigger I: Final Secret of the Illuminati (Falcon Press 1987) —
we will take this very slowly. Bell's Theorem asserts that:
If some sort of objective universe exists in some sense (i.e., if
we do not accept the most solipsistic heresies uttered by
careless proponents of Copenhagenism), and,
If the equations of quantum mechanics have a similarity of
structure (isomorphism) to that universe, then,
Some sort of non-local correlation exists between any two
particles that once came in contact.
The full weirdness of this will strike you when you
remember that the classic type of non-local correlation
previously claimed among humans consists of the
"magical" idea that if a shaman gets his hands on a lock of
your hair, anything he does to that hair will have an effect
on you. Frazer called that idea "sympathetic magic" in The
Golden Bough and characterized it as typical of "primitive"
thinking. Has the most advanced science returned to the
most "primitive" ideas?

267

i68

Cat and Mouse

Not quite. We will explain the subtleties of "non-local
correlation" in a moment. First, let us note that the idea of
non-local correlation seems so unholy or unthinkable to
some physicists (who recognize its haunting resemblance
to shamanic magic) that they have decided to evade the
consequences of Bell's math by challenging the first step
above and retreating to an unashamed solipsism. This path
has thus far appeared overtly (as far as I know) only in two
articles by Dr. N. David Mermin of Columbia University
("Quantum Mysteries for Everyone," Journal of Philosophy
Vol. 78, 1981, and "Is the Moon There When Nobody
Looks?" Physics Today, April 1985). Dr. Mermin claims the
moon does disappear when nobody looks.
Yes. I do not exaggerate. Dr. Mermin writes, "The moon
is demonstrably not there when nobody is looking." Ah, I
think, if only the man had some knowledge of E-Prime...
Please remember that Dr. Mermin's position differs from
my claim, which holds that the moon does not appear in
our observed universe until somebody looks, but I do not
assert we can make meaningful assertions about either
existence or non-existence in "the real universe" and can only
make meaningful utterances after somebody looks at the
observed universe.
Nobody has cared (yet) to challenge the middle term in
Bell's argument. The equations of quantum mechanics
have higher isomorphism with the observed universe than
anything else in science. We know this because these equations appear in the theory underlying about 9 0 % of the
technology we use every day (estimate of John Gribbin).
They appear in TV, in atomic energy, in computers, in
molecular biology, in genetic engineering and "all over the
shop." If these equations had a major defect, it would have
come to light by now. (Minor defects probably exist, as in
all human endeavor, but a major defect would mean that
things would blow up all around us every day.) No: the
quantum equations have, probably, the highest level of
pragmatic (experimental, practical, daily use) confirmation
of any branch of science.

Quantum Psychology

169

So, assuming a universe that humans can observe, and
an isomorphism between that universe and quantum
mathematics, Bell's conclusion seems mathematically
inescapable. It has also survived seven experimental tests,
with increasingly sophisticated instruments, and seems
vindicated to all but those who, like Dr. Mermin, find
solipsism less "irrational" than non-locality.
So, what do we mean by "non-locality" in Bell's sense?
Can we differentiate it from shamanic magic? Yes, we can.
It will then appear, not at all "as weird as magic." It will
appear far weirder.
AH pre-quantum models of the universe, including
Einstein's Relativity, have assumed that all correlations
involve connections. In other words, they assume that if
whenever A goes ping!, В then goes pong!, the explanation
must lie in some connection between A and B. If the pingpong response continued, over and over, with no connec­
tion between A and B, that would seem spooky indeed to
classical physics (and to common sense).
In Newtonian physics, the connection between ping and
pong appears mechanical and deterministic (A pushes and
В gets pushed, etc.); in thermodynamics, the connection
appears mechanical and statistical (when enough A's
bounce around enough, they will hit enough B's to get the
B's bouncing, too); in electromagnetism, the connection
appears as the intersection or interaction of fields; in
Relativity, the connection appears as a result of the curva­
ture of space (which we call "gravity"); but the correlation,
in any case, involves some sort of connection.
In a simple model, all pre-quantum physics assumed a
kind of billiard-table universe. If a ball moves, the cause
lies in mechanics (it got hit by another ball) or fields (an
electromagnetic field pulled the ball in one direction rather
than another) or geometry (the table curves a certain way)
but the ball does not move without cause.
In quantum mechanics, since the 1920s, non-local
effects — correlations without connections — have seemed
to many physicists the only explanation of some of the
behavior of sub-atomic systems. (Bohr used the word

Cat and Mouse
"non-local" as early as 1928.) Bell merely proved mathe­
matically that these non-local effects indeed must exist if
quantum math meshes with the observed universe.
In these non-local effects, when we say no connection
exists to explain the correlation, we mean, more bluntly,
that no "cause" exists — in any sense that we have ever
understood "cause".
Imagine a billiard table without players. Nobody hits
any balls. No earthquake shakes the room. No magnet
exists, hidden under the table. Yet suddenly Ball A at one
end of the table turns clockwise and Ball В at the other end
of the table turns counterclockwise.
If you told that to the Incredible Randi, he would insist
some fraud or hoax existed. Yet such non-local correlations
appear mathematically necessary to quantum mechanics
and experiments have measured them repeatedly.
The billiard table model only suggests one aspect of non­
local reality. Another model, from a lecture by Dr. Bell
himself — as reported to me by Dr. Herbert — goes as
follows:
Imagine two men, in Dublin and Honolulu. Imagine that
we have observed them carefully for some time and have
deduced some "laws" of their behavior. One law states
that, whenever the man in Dublin wears red socks, the
man in Honolulu will wear green socks. We then experi­
mentally meddle with the system — we " c a u s e " ("or
leastways bring it about," as Joyce says) that the man in
Dublin takes off his red socks, and dons green socks. We
immediately check our monitors in Honolulu. We find that
the man there has instantaneously taken off his green socks
and donned red socks! (I disapprove of exclamation marks
in expository prose, but this case seems to deserve at least
one. Perhaps it deserves three or more...)
"Instantaneously" means, among other things, that, we
know for sure that no signal from Dublin could have
reached Honolulu to create a connection between the
events. Signals travel at the speed of light (or less) and cannot
cause an instantaneous response. So the result in Honolulu
does not even qualify as a "response", strictly, and would

Quantum Psychology
quickly get classified as a coincidence — except that, if
these men continued to act like Bell particles, the same
correlation would occur every time we got either men to
change his socks.
(The highly technical atomic experiments showing this
kind of behavior appear in Gribbin's In Search of Schroedinger's Cat and Herbert's Quantum Reality.)
Well, now, you can see how this differs from primitive
"sympathetic magic". Magic involves some "occult" theory
of causality, but this correlation without connection does
not fit any theory of causality. Magic also travels one way,
in theory, but this does not seem to involve travel at all —
unless you want to try to imagine two-way instantaneous
"travel". In short, magic does not have quite the weirdness
of non-local correlation.
Dr. Jack Sarfatti, incidentally, calls the non-local correlation "information without transportation." You might try
that if you find my term "correlation without connection"
a bit opaque.
Jungian synchronicity, of course — accepted not just by
Jungians but a lot of other psychologists — also involves
this kind of non-local and non-causal correlation. Indeed,
Jung specified that synchronicity could not fit into any
purely causal, billiard-ball theory of the universe. Most
scientists outside psychology felt, before experimental
verifications of Bell's Theorem, that only psychologists
could talk such nonsense... But now the matter seems to
need re-examination.
Let us now, finally, confront the implications of Bell's
Theorem for the multiple universe model.
In the last decade, physicists have spent a lot of time
debating something called the Anthropic Principle which
says, briefly, that we live in a universe that looks suspiciously as if it would necessarily produce human beings
eventually. In less careful language, it looks as if
"designed" for humans.
Now, this reverses the last 300 years of science. "Design"
in general and especially anthropic design played a large
role in Aristotelian and theological thought once, but

1J2

Cat and Mouse

science decided it could do very well without any "design"
postulates. Nonetheless, the anthropic principle now
seems stronger that it ever did in the theological era.
You see, several cosmologists have noted a group of
rather singular facts about our universe, all of which
reduce to the simple proposition: if we change any of the
constants of physics even very slightly (as little as 0.01 per cent
in many cases) we find the result would produce a universe in
which humans could not have evolved.
In other words, of all possible universes that might have
emerged from the Big Bang, most of them would either
collapse quickly, or evolve briefly into various gaseous
formations, or evolve into galaxies of stars without any
planets, or develop in one way or another that would not
allow the possibility of human life.
Prof. Paul Davies examines these demonstrations at
length, with mathematical rigor, in his The Accidental
Universe. He arrives at the conclusion that we must either
accept the EWG model of many, many universes, most of
them without humans, or, if we insist on the "common sense"
one universe, we must accept that some Anthropic Principle
has worked to "design" or evolve that universe in a direction that made it possible for us to exist.
In simple language — we have two choices: many
universes, or one universe with something suspiciously
like a Designer. No matter how hard its proponents work
to make the latter choice sound abstract and mathematical,
it still sounds like "God" to most readers.
Of course, the Designer (as conventionally conceived)
does not receive a cordial reception in scientific circles. He
belongs to the theologians, scientists think, and He definitely does not belong in a scientific account of the
universe.
In current debate, the Anthropic Principle has broken
down into a Strong Anthropic Principle and a Weak
Anthropic Principle; the former yields results more
compatible with the Designer hypothesis. Even the Weak
Anthropic Principle, however, opens a door through
which the Designer may creep back into science.

Quantum

Psychology

173

Now Dr. Wheeler re-enters the story.
(In this discussion, I largely follow a popularization of
Dr. Wheeler's current theorizing: "Turning Einstein Upside Down," by John Glidedman, Science Digest, October
1984.)
Bell's Theorem shows that, if quantum theory corresponds to something like a physical universe — if quantum theory does not collapse into solipsism, as critics of
Copenhagenism always expect it will — non-local correlations must exist in the universe as well as in our math. But
these non-local correlations need not be correlations in
space, as I have presented them thus far (for the sake of
clarity and simplicity). Bell's Theorem indicates that nonlocal correlations in time must also appear in a quantum
universe. (I left that out until now because it really boggles
the mind, if the reader does not get led to it slowly, a step
at a time.)
Non-local space-correlations (or space-like correlations,
as strict Relativists would say) merely abolish our concept
of linear causality, or transcend it, or ignore it. Non-local
time-correlations, or time-like correlations precisely turn
causality on its head.
Thus: two photons enter the same measuring instrument.
This creates the contact that becomes, in Bell's math, a nonlocal correlation. But one of the photons came to the instrument from a candle across the room, and the other came
from a star 1,000,000 light-years away. But the non-local
correlation does not change (its rate of change = 0, in Bell's
equations) in either space-like or time-like separations.
For the two photons to fit this requirement, the one that
left the star 1,000,000 years ago must have had its properties set in place 1,000,000 years ago, which seems absurd,
even for the Quantum Wonderland. (This implies the
photon "knew" we would measure it 1,000,0000 years
later, so it dressed appropriately before leaving the star
and beginning its long journey.)
So, then, alternatively, the photon doesn't leave the star
1,000,000 years ago "until" in a sense the result of our
measurement today travels non-locally in time "back" to

174

Cat and Mouse

the star and "adjust" the photon to correlate with the other
photon from the candle.
What did I just say?
Yes, we now have a backward-in-time causality, not
necessarily as the literal truth in some Aristotelian sense,
but as the only kind of model that makes sense in terms of the
data we now have.
In Wheeler's words, ".. .we are wrong to think of the past
having a definite existence 'out there'."
Copenhagenistically and pragmatically, any model of the
past serves us, or fails to serve us, in dealing with our
problems now. The traditional model of the past — having
a definite existence "out there" — does not serve us, if we
want to understand the non-local correlation. Thus, we
need a model in which the present can influence the past.
Without the "is of identity", this poses no problems, for
me.
With the "is of identity", we arrive at endless paradoxes
and a model that only a mental patient can take seriously.
We arrive at, in fact, a universe which changes as a blocklike entity — all of it, past, present and future — every time we
make a measurement.
And, I think, if Einstein's mouse accidentally triggers our
measuring instruments, then the mouse can, after all,
change the whole universe.
Dr. Herbert sensibly asks how taking a measurement can
have this "magic" power. I don't think it can. I think we
need a model with backward causality, at this point, until
we find a better model, because otherwise we contradict
the facts of quantum experiments. But I do not think the
model "is" the universe. When the model gets this peculiar, we need to build a better model.
Meanwhile, until the better model (or "new paradigm")
arrives, within the current Wheeler model, the many, many
universes of the old EWG model still exist in super-space
somewhere, but we have "selected" this Anthropic universe by the kind of experiments we have conducted.
If you accept the Wheeler model as the final truth,
then...

Quantum Psychology
The Designer, at long last, appears revealed; the door of
the Law has fallen open and we enter.
Our experiments here and now, Wheeler says, travel
non-locally in time-space, as Bell indicates. Along the way
they intersect the Big Bang, along with everything in general. The Big Bang thus gradually gets "fine-tuned" so to
speak and the universe around us becomes Anthropic — a
universe in which humans can and must exist. We did it to
ourselves.
In short, we don't need to postulate a supernatural
Designer. Our experiments create the universe observed by
our experiments — which when interpreted always yield
an Anthropic universe, rather than any of the millions or
billions of possible non-Anthropic universes — because we
designed the experiments.
Okay?
Of course, this still does not mean the same as the New
Age slogan "We create our own reality." Wheeler emphatically does not think thought or mind or consciousness have
anything to do with this circular-causal chain. Only nuclear experiments influence the particles which non-locally
tune the Big Bang to produce our selves and our universe.
Nonetheless, it seems decidedly odd that the "Designer"
also appears as you and me and the guy leaning on the
lamp-post in the account of quantum mechanics written by
Eddington nearly 60 years ago, and Eddington did not
follow Wheeler's path of non-local correlations and backward-in-time causality. Eddington merely followed the
Copenhagen Interpretation back into its origins in pragmatism and existentialism, as I have, and arrived at the conclusion which he expressed thus (Philosophy of Physical
Science, page 148):
We have found a strange foot-print on the shores of the
unknown. We have devised profound theories, one after
another, to account for its origin. At last, we have succeeded in reconstructing the creature that made the footprint. And, lo! It is our own.
The Sufi equivalent, a thousand years earlier, goes like
this: the marvelous Mullah Nasrudin, while out riding in

Cat and Mouse

176

the desert, saw a band of men on horses in the distance.
Knowing that bandits frequented that area, Nasrudin
galloped off in the opposite direction, as fast as his donkey
could travel.
The men on horses, however, recognized the divine
Mullah. "Now why would the wisest man in Islam rush off
like that?" they asked one another. So they decided to
follow him, thinking he would lead them to something
marvelous.
Looking back, Nasrudin saw that the "bandits" had started to chase him. He spurred his donkey to gallop faster.
The men followed faster, determined not to miss out on
the mysterious doings of the great Nasrudin. The chase
continued, with everybody rushing faster all the time, until
Nasrudin saw a graveyard. Quickly, he dismounted and
hid behind a gravestone.
The men rode up and, sitting on their horses, looked
over the gravestone at Nasrudin. A thoughtful pause
occurred, while everybody pondered hard, especially
Nasrudin who now recognized the men as old friends.
"Why are you hiding behind a gravestone?" one of them
finally asked.
"It's more complicated than you realize," Nasrudin said.
"I'm here because of you and you're here because of me."

Exercizes
1. Let the class discuss the Zen riddle, "Who is the One
more wonderful than all the Buddhas and sages?"
2. According to a story in News of the Weird, op. cit. six
men in the Philippines once got into an argument about
"which came first, the chicken or the egg." Tempers flared,
guns emerged, and four of the six got shot dead. See if the
class can discuss the Wheeler theory, pro and con, without
equally drastic results.
3. Apply, with your own ingenium, the Wheeler model to
an ordinary quarrel between humans.

Quantum

Psychology

177

4. Take the top off the tank behind the toilet, pull the
handle and watch how the water level returns to its previous height after flushing. This shows the simplest possible
circular-causal mechanism in an ordinary home. Apply
circular-causal analysis to:
A. Race relations in the U.S. and the Union of South
Africa.
B. The cold war.
C. The average divorce.
D. Self-fulfilling prophecies in corporation/union
relations.

TWENTY-ONE
Wigner's Friend, or Whodunit?
Another Nobel laureate, Dr. Eugene Wigner, added a more
complex twist to the Schroedinger's Cat problem, and
conclusions emerged similar to Wheeler's observer-created
Anthropic universe, but also startlingly different.
Please remember that we deal always with probabilities, not
certitudes, and you will not get too flustered as we proceed
to the next twist in Quantum Psychology's kinky yellow
brick road.
In the original cat problem, we had a physicist in a lab, a
box, a cat inside the box, a poison gas pellet inside the box,
and some radioactive decay process that would sooner or
later trigger the explosion of the pellet and the death of the
cat. We found that, without opening the box, the equations
that describe quantum decay yield a solution in which the
statements "the cat has died" and "the cat still remains
alive" remain equally "true" or equally "false", or at least
remain 5 0 % probabilities. Von Neumann's logic would
have us say both statements remain in the "maybe" state,
like a coin in mid-air.
When we open the box, we find a live cat, or a dead cat,
and no more maybe, like a coin that has landed heads or
tails. It seems then that we collapsed the state vector by
opening the box.
Very well, but now let us look at it from the perspective
of another physicist, outside the laboratory. Wigner called
this second Observer a friend of the physicist in the lab,
and thus this new problem has the title, The Wigner's
Friend Paradox.
178

Quantum

Psychology

T-79

After ten minutes, as in our original example, the physicist in the lab, Ernest, opens the box and finds a live cat. (I
like happy endings.)
For Ernest, then, the state vector has "collapsed". The
probabilities no longer register as 50% dead and 50% alive,
but as 0% dead and 100% alive.
The friend in the hall, Eugene, however, has not heard
the news yet. From his perspective, Ernest in the lab
remains, like the whole experimental system, in a "maybe"
state. Very concretely, Ernest consists of molecules, which
consist of atoms, which consist of "particles" a n d / o r
"waves", which follow quantum laws, and Ernest remains
with an uncollapsed state vector...until he opens the lab
door, sticks his head out and announces, "Tabby hasn't
died yet." For Eugene, then, hearing the news collapsed the
state vector.
Of course, we all consist of molecules, which consist of
atoms, which consist of "particles" and/or "waves" and
we all remain in various "maybe" states until we make a
choice in the existential sense.
Between choices, we evidently return to the "maybe"
state until we make another choice. "Existence precedes
essence," remember?
So, from the point of view of Eugene in the hallway, we
all contain quantum uncertainty. The quantum uncertainty
only "collapses" into a definite "he done it" or "he didn't
do it" when Eugene observes us.
Now, across the ocean another physicist waits impatiently for the result of this experiment in felixicide. Let us
call her Elizabeth.
From Elizabeth's point of view, the state vector does not
collapse when Ernest tells Eugene, "Got a live cat in here,
after all." The state vector in Elizabeth's universe only
collapses when Eugene rushes to a phone, a fax, a computer net or whatever and transmits the signal, "Live cat
this time." For Elizabeth, the state vector collapsed when the
signal arrived. The signal, then, collapsed the state vector, in
Elizabeth's universe.

Cat and Mouse
A fourth physicist, Robin, waits anxiously to hear what
electronic message Elizabeth has received...and in Robin's
world, the state vector has not collapsed yet...
And so on.. .for any number of Observers.
We seem to have arrived back at Von Neumann's
Catastrophe of the Infinite Regress, in a different form.
Some will attempt to evade the obvious implications
here by saying the state vector only exists as a mathematical formula in human heads — and only in some human
heads (those belonging to physicists, in fact). In that case,
the Wigner's Friend problem does not have the radical
import of Einstein's discovery of the relativity of instrument readings. In the Wigner case, the relativity (of when
the state vector collapses) only exists in our conceptualizing, whereas Einstein's relativity exists in meter readings.
This objection overlooks the fundamental discovery of
quantum mechanics, which I have stated in dozens of
ways ever since the beginning of this book, but which
remains so "alien" to our Aristotelian culture that we
continually forget it even after we think we have learned.
That discovery, to say it again and yet another way,
consists in the facts that:
(1) We cannot make meaningful statements about some
assumed "real universe", or some "deep reality" underlying "this universe," or some "true reality", etc. apart from
ourselves and our nervous systems and other instruments.
Any statements we do make about such a "deep" reality
separate from us can never become subject to proof, or to
disproof, and that makes them "meaningless" (or "noise").
(2) Any meaningful scientific or existential or phenomenological statement reports on how our nervous systems or
other instruments have recorded some event or events in
space-time.
The reader has read several variations on this, and
performed exercizes designed (I have hoped) to make this
experientially clear, and yet Wigner's argument probably
still sounds a bit "queer" to some of you out there. Well, it
concerns only probabilities as I said again at the beginning of

Quantum

Psychology

181

this chapter, and (1) it does not attempt to describe a
"deep" reality separate from us and (2) it does describe the
kind of "reality" we can experience with our nervous
systems and other instruments, so the Wigner argument
qualifies as meaningful scientific speech.
Let us try it in reverse. The "common sense" verdict
would say, "Well, the damned cat is either dead or alive,
even if nobody ever opens the box."
Since, by its own terms, this can never become subject to
test, it has no meaning. As soon as a test does occur, and
somebody peeks into the box, we have left "common
sense" a n d / o r Aristotelian "reality" and entered operational non-Aristotelian "reality". In short, once a test
occurs we enter the area of science, of existentialism, and
of meaningful speech. Without a test, we remain in the
area of noise — "sound and fury signifying nothing," as
the Bard said.
"The cat is alive or dead even if nobody looks" has an
uncanny resemblance, if you think about it, to that other
famous "isness" statement, "The bread is now the body of
Jesus Christ, even if every instrument still registers it as
bread." Such non-instrumental, non-existential "truths"
may make good surrealist paintings or poems — they may
provoke creativity and imagination, etc. — but they do not
contain information or meaning in any phenomenological
context.
But "we" of course remains undefined above.
If we define "we" as the folks in the laboratory, then
meaningful speech begins when the box opens. If we
define "we" as the folks in the hall, rubbing shoulders with
Wigner's Friend, meaningful speech begins when Ernest
opens the lab door and says "Live cat again." If we define
"we" as the physicists across the ocean, meaningful speech
begins when the electronic signal arrives...
I know, I know. It all sounds very weird.
That's why Einstein had to remind us, "Common sense
tells us the earth is flat."

Cat and Mouse
Please note, that, even if "The cat is dead or alive even if
nobody looks" may fit the meaningless category, but "The cat is
dead" and "The cat is alive" do not fit that category.
They fit the category of the indeterminate. Remember the
distinction between the indeterminate and the meaning­
less?
Thus, "Somebody put a time bomb under the table" does
not qualify as a meaningless statement, even if nobody has
looked yet. The odds seem very high that somebody will
look, if you speak this aloud. In fact, probably everybody
will look...
The statement remains "indeterminate" in the time
between hearing it and actually checking under the table
carefully. Then it becomes either "true" or "false".
Got it?
N on-Aristotelian logic deals with existential/operational
probabilities. Aristotelian logic deals with certainties, and in the
lack of certainties throughout most of life, Aristotelian logic
subliminally programs us to invent fictitious certainties.
That rush for fictitious certainties explains most of the
Ideologies and damned near all the Religions on the
planet, I think.

Exercizes
1. Classify the following propositions as true, false,
meaningless or merely currently indeterminate.
A. The U.S. Air Force has several dead extra-terrestrials
hidden in a hanger at Edwards Air Force Base.
B. This exercize contains thirteen propositions.
C. All propositions in this exercize are false.
D. No good cop ever takes a bribe.
E. The function of public education consists of killing
curiosity, encouraging docility, and preparing
mindless drones to work for corporations.
F. Gorbachev has an advantage over everybody else in
the Politburo because he remains sober when the
rest of them have all gotten drunk.
G. Proposition В is false.

Quantum

Psychology

183

H. Proposition G is false.
I. God loves everybody, even serial killers, rapists and
C.I.A. agents.
J. All propositions are true in some sense, false in
some sense, meaningless in some sense, true and
false in some sense, true and meaningless in some
sense, false and meaningless in some sense, and true
and false and meaningless in some sense.
2. Try living for one day with this (possibly) self-fulfilling
prophecy: "I am dumb and unattractive and nobody likes
me."
3. Try living for one day with this program: "I am
brilliant and attractive and everybody likes me."
4. Decide which of the two above exercizes you liked
best, and try living with that program for a full month.
Observe all old programs that re-assert themselves and
interfere with this exercize.

PART FIVE
The Non-Local Self
If quantum mechanics hasn't profoundly shocked you,
you haven't understood it yet.
— Niels Bohr

TWENTY- TWO
Hidden Variables & The Invisible World
As I mentioned earlier, Einstein did not like the Copenhagen Interpretation. His debate with Bohr about this issue
continued for over twenty years and filled the pages of
many learned journals; the majority of physicists, when the
debate had run its course, decided the Bohr had won.
Nonetheless, some of Einstein's arguments continued to
haunt the physics community and a small minority kept
wondering if the Father of Relativity might not have
scored a few telling points along the way.
Einstein's favorite line of criticism revolved around his
claim that quantum mechanics, as known then (and as still
known) may not constitute a "complete" theory of the subatomic realm. In ordinary language, this means that the
Uncertainty and Indeterminacy of quantum equations —
however useful these equations prove every day in
technology — contains a possible hole through which an
entirely new Quantum Theory may someday march.
In simple terms, the fact that we cannot remove the
Uncertainty and Indeterminacy today does not necessarily
register a fact about the limits of scientific method (as Bohr
believed) or about the limits of scientific method and the
human nervous system (as I have argued). Uncertainty
and Indeterminacy may simply register the "incompleteness" of quantum mechanics.
Eventually, the Einstein argument evolved into the
Hidden Variable hypothesis. Suppose we eventually discover variables, currently unknown, and suppose these
variables explain the collapse of the state vector. If that
187

188

The Non-Local Self

happens, then the Copenhagen Interpretation will become
obsolete — along with von Neumann's three-valued logic,
the multiple worlds model, and the monstrous progeny of
Schroedinger's cat and Wigner's friend.
A realm of hidden variables — an invisible, sub-quantal
"world" — if we can ever demonstrate it in a laboratory,
would then explain how the state vector "collapses" from a
probability, before measurement, to a certainty, after
measurement. We can then say the Hidden Variables did
it, and we don't have to say the act of measurement did
it — or the report of the act of measurement did it, as in the
Wigner argument. "Common sense" and maybe even
Aristotelian logic can arise again from the graves to which
physics consigned them in the 1920s.
Unfortunately, two major objections exist to the Hidden
Variable model.
In the first place, Hidden Variable theories "sound
wrong" and even smell wrong to modern scientists. They
suggest Aristotelian "essences" and even Platonic "deep
realities" and other metaphysical entities, or spooks. They
even remind some scholars of the alleged "hidden essence
of Jesus" which Catholics claim lies buried within something that appears only a piece of bread to our senses and
instruments. In short, they have a distinctly medieval
stench about them.
More technically, this objection states that Hidden
Variables still remain indeterminate and sound almost as if
they might remain indeterminate forever and thus deserve
the curse of "meaninglessness" or "noise". After all, no
matter how many experiments fail to find the Hidden
Variables, the die-hard proponents of these spooks can still
claim, "We just haven't looked in the right place yet." That
path leads to endless philosophical debate, not to scientific
operations.
The second objection to Hidden Variable theories seems
even stronger. Scientists have used quantum theory for 90
years in some form or other, for 70 years in its (allegedly)
complete form, and have not found any evidence for
Hidden Variables at all, at all.

Quantum

Psychology

189

These arguments led physicists, or the overwhelming
majority of them, to consign Hidden Variables to the dustbin, alongside Catholic "essences", the phlogiston and
luminiferous ether theories and "Natural Law" (in the
moral or political sense). We can do quite well without
such spooks, the scientific community agreed.
Or so it seemed until Dr. David Bohm suggested a new
test for Bell's Theorem and Dr. Aspect of Orsay performed
the test several times.
It now appears that we may have a more "complete"
quantum theory at hand, one that includes Hidden
Variables. However, at this point, that does not mean we
have found "deep reality" and can junk the Copenhagen
Interpretation. It simply means that we have another new
model — which implies, for most physicists, another
argument for "model agnosticism" or zeteticism.
Let us look at this Hidden Variable model:
Everybody agrees — well almost everybody: a few
heretics dissent from every verdict in quantum mechanics — but almost everybody agrees that Aspect's experiments clearly demonstrated the non-local correlation.
Some claim Aspect also demonstrated a kind of Hidden
Variable. Others vigorously deny this. John Gribbin,
physics editor of New Scientist, claims that Aspect's experiments not only fail to support Hidden Variable theories
but clearly refute them once and for all.
Obviously, we here enter an area where the best-informed physicists have trouble understanding each other,
or what they mean by the terms of their own debates.
The problem seems to lie in different concepts of what
we mean by a Hidden Variable. Dr. Bohm, the man who
suggested the design of the Aspect experiments, means
something that Einstein and other proto-Hidden Variable
theorists had not conceived. From Bohm's point of view,
the Aspect experiments weaken the case for local hidden
variables, but they tend to support the concept of non-local
hidden variables.
And what, by all the pot-bellied Buddhas in Burma, do
we mean by a non-local hidden variable?

1Q0

The Non-Local Self

Well, as explained in the last section, non-local correla­
tions transcend causality and also subvert our traditional
notions of " s p a c e " and "time". If two "particles" — or
"events", or Whatnots — have a non-local correlation, in
modern quantum theory, this means that they will remain
correlated even when no signal, no field, no mechanical
push-or-pull, no energy, no "cause" of any sort can travel
from one to the other.
In the Aspect experiments, for instance, photons at two
ends of an experimental apparatus retained their Bell
correlation whenever Aspect took a measurement — and
yet the measurements could only occur after the photons
passed special switches that allowed measurement only in
the last 10 nanoseconds of the experiment. Light would
have taken 20 nanoseconds to travel from one photon to
the other, and — as you probably have heard — no energy
known to physics can travel faster than light. In other
words, no physical energy could carry a signal from
photon A to photon B, or from photon В to photon A, and
make a connection that would allow us a causal explanation.
You can see that no local hidden variables can account
for this. Hence, one form of the hidden variable theory
definitely cannot be invoked to explain this "correlation
without connection." That hardly "refutes" local hidden
variable theories, but does show, once again, that quantum
experiments have not yet revealed any "incompleteness"
that we can fill in by positing a local hidden variable.
However, a non-local hidden variable might explain
Aspect's results and several other experiments, performed
since Bell published his Theorem, which all indicate that
non-local correlations do appear in the laboratory
(experimentally) as well as in the equations (theoretically).
We still don't have a very clear idea of what a non-local
hidden variable would look like, do we?
Dr. Bohm, who started thinking about non-locality as
early as 1952, has over the years developed a mathematical
m o d e l of non-local hidden variables, and — m o r e
marvelous yet — has even found a way to write in fairly
normal English about what this math " m e a n s " . (His

Quantum

Psychology

191

English involves turning a lot of static nouns into dynamic
verbs, but I think I can get the same effect by merely
continuing to avoid the static "is of identity.") You can
read about Bohm's model (with his own peculiar English)
in his book, Wholeness and the Implicate Order (London, Ark
Paperbacks, 1983).
Briefly, Dr. Bohm posits an explicate or unfolded order
(he uses both words) which makes up the 4-dimensional
continuum known to post-Einstein science. This order,
which we normally call the visible universe, he names
explicate or unfolded because it occupies space-time —
every part of it has a location. You can say you found the
part here in space, not somewhere else, and now in time,
not sometime else.
This explicate order corresponds roughly to the hardware
of a computer, or to our brains. (Dr. Karl Pribram, the
neurologist, has adopted Bohm's model to explain some
mysteries of brain functioning.)
Dr. Bohm next posits an implicate or enfolded order (he
uses both words) which both "permeates" and transcends
the 4-dimensional explicate Einsteinian universe. This
order he calls implicate or enfolded because it does not
occupy specific space-time — no part of it has a location. You
cannot find it only here in space, but also somewhere and
everywhere else; you cannot localize it only here in time, but
anytime and everytime else. (Only its explicate results have
locality. It itself remains non-local.)
This implicate order corresponds to the software in our
computers — and in our brains, according to Dr. Pribram.
Everything on the explicate-unfolded level has locality
and appears causal (until one examines its smallest, quantum parts); everything on the implicate-enfolded level has
non-locality and appears non-causal.
We have only managed to observe non-locality in the
form of its results, i.e., non-local correlations on the explicate-unfolded (space-time) level — since Bell inspired us to
look for them — because this unfolded level acts as the
extension in space-time of the always non-local and nonspatio-temporal implicate order. In other words, a sub-

192

The N on-Local Self

quantal world rather like the "deep reality" banned by
Niels Bohr exists, but we cannot observe or experience it;
yet we cannot call it a "spook" or "meaningless concept"
because we observe its effects as non-local correlations that
make no sense at all unless we assume something like this
implicate order.
However, the implicate order as a scientific model does
not equal classic "deep reality" in the Aristotelian sense,
because it has the role of one model among many. Bohm,
its father, does not claim it ranks as "the only true model"
or the "final" model or anything like that.
If the computer and brain metaphors have not made the
implicate order clear enough for the reader, try another
model: a performance of Beethoven's Ninth has all the
characteristics of hardware or the explicate order. You can
locate it very precisely in space-time — at 9 p.m. on
Tuesday at the Old Opera House, say — and if you get
these space-time coordinates confused you will miss the
performance.
But Beethoven's Ninth also has an implicate, enfolded
existence as software, which does not exactly correspond
to Dr. Bohm's implicate order but approximates to it. If
every printed copy of the symphony could have a date and
locale affixed — "We found this one in Lenny Bernstein's
summer home on Sunday November 2 3 , " etc. — some
aspect of the Ninth would still remain non-local because
we can't say, exactly, how many heads contain all or part
of it.
In Ray Bradbury's science fiction novel Fahrenheit 451, a
totalitarian state has burned all books, but this only
destroys the local "hardware" of the books. A group of
subversives have memorized all the classics, teach them
continually to others, who teach others, etc. and the books
remain partly non-local and inaccessible to the book-burners. (Some of us have similarly preserved some George
Carlin routines, not out of any paranoid fear that our society will soon enter a similar totalitarian nightmare, but
simply because we have played his videos so often that we
have memorized large portions of them. Quite large parts

Quantum

Psychology

193

of Casablanca have achieved a similar degree of nonlocality.)
These musical-literary analogs intend to help the reader
get a handle on non-locality. But true non-locality in the
Bohmian sense would continue even if all human beings died.
An approximation toward a thinkable model of this
requires television as an exemplar. As cynics often note
mournfully, the TV shows of the 1950s still travel through
space-time and denizens of solar systems forty light-years
away, systems we can't even see, might start receiving Ed
Sullivan, Milton Berle and news of the MacCarthy Era any
day now — and try to understand us on the basis of those
signals...
Thus, Milton Berle has achieved something like nonlocality.
Another analogy, without locality and non-locality, at
least helps clarify implicate and explicate. I call you on the
phone. The words emerge from my mouth as implicate or
unfolded sound-waves. The transmitter in my phone
converts them to implicate or enfolded electrical charges.
The receiver on your phone picks up these enfolded
charges and unfolds them, so they become explicate
sound-waves again, and you "hear me talking."
Similarly, a friend in New York sends me a bit of software on a floppy disc. I put this enfolded message in my
computer and it appears, unfolded, as a new computer
game, on the console screen.
Now, the consequences of this implicate/explicate model
seem even stranger than we suspect at first sight. For
instance, just as Einstein's Relativity abolished the
dichotomy of "space" and "time", and modern psychosomatic medicine tends to abolish the distinction between
"mind" and "body", this Bohm model seems to undermine
our traditional dualism of "consciousness" and "matter".
In a non-local implicate order, information cannot have a
locality, but "permeates" and/or "transcends" all localities. And information that has no locality sounds a great
deal like the Hindu divinity Brahma, the Chinese concept
of Tao, Aldous Huxley's "Mind At Large," and "the

194

The Non-Local Self

Buddha-Mind" of Mahayana Buddhism. Any one of those
concepts must mean information without location (if we
admit they mean anything at all).
"The Buddha-Mind is not 'God'," Buddhists continually
explain, and Occidentals blink, unable to understand a
religion without "God". But Brahma, in Vedic Hinduism,
does not have any of the personality, locality, temperament (or gender) of Western "gods" and, like BuddhaMind, seems to mean a kind of non-local implicate order,
or information without location, if it means anything.
Bohm has avoided speculating about this parallel
between his math and ancient Oriental mysticism, but
others have not. Dr. Capra in The Tao of Physics uses a
Bohmian non-local model of quantum theory as the "true"
model (ignoring the physicists who prefer EWG or Copenhagenism) and then points out, quite correctly, that (if we
accept this as "the only true quantum model") quantum
theory says the same things Taoism has always said.
Indeed, Lao-Tse's famous paradox, "The largest is within
the smallest" only begins to make sense to an Occidental
after she or he has understood what non-local information
means in modern physics.
Dr. Evan Harris Walker goes further. In a paper, "The
Compleat Quantum Anthropologist" (American Anthropological Association, 1975) Dr. Walker — a physicist, not
an anthropologist, by the way — develops a neo-Bohmian
Hidden Variable model in which "consciousness" does not
exist locally at all but only appears localized due to our
errors of perception. In this model, our "minds" do not
reside in our brains but non-locally permeate and/or transcend space-time entirely. Our brains, then, merely "tune
in" this non-local consciousness (which now sounds even
more like Huxley's "Mind At Large").
Dr. Walker develops a mathematical model of this nonlocal Self and uses the model to derive predictions about
how often the alleged psychokinesis of parapsychologists
can occur. His results correlate with the scores made by
persons very successful in psychokinesis experiments. In
other words, people rated good at "controlling" the fall of

Quantum

Psychology

195

dice, because they score above chance, score on the average
only as far above chance at the non-local Hidden Variable model
says they can.
(For further details on the Walker model and its correlation with parapsychology, look up his paper, or consult
my New Inquisition, op. cit.)

Exercize
Since you probably do not have the equipment to perform
sub-atomic experiments, and since the "parapsychological" implications of Hidden Variable theories excite people
more than the physics does, try the following experiment:
Secure a brain-machine that produces 4 hertz wave
forms in the brain. (You can obtain a catalog of brain
machines from Inner Technologies, 51 Berryl Trail, Fairfax
CA 94930.) Set the machine for 4 hertz for about 30 minutes. Then conduct some classic ESP and PK experiments
in the class.
Try to avoid prejudice, pro or con PSI research. Try to
just do the experiments and note the results.
I would consider it a great kindness if you would send
me the results, whatever happens.
1

1

Nobody knows why at present, but "paranormal" events seem
much more likely at 4 hertz than at any other brainwave
frequency.

TWENTY-THREE
Quantum Futurism
Earlier, we discussed the four basic systems that, in the
majority of Terrans at this stage of evolution, make up the
hardware and software out of which our multiple selves
emerge. To review:
1. The Oral Bio-Survival System, largely determined by
early infantile imprints, deals with seeking Safe Space and
avoiding the Dangerous or Alien.
If somebody points a gun at you, whatever self has
predominance in this bio-survival system "takes over" the
brain at once. Whether you run, or faint, or smash the
assailant with a karate chop, you won't remember making
the decision. "I just found myself doing it," you will say
afterward, because the ancient reptilian circuits of this
system move as instant reflexes.
2. The Anal Territorial System, largely determined by
imprints at the toddler stage, deals with seizing territory
and holding some defined status in the mammalian pack
or human family and/or community.
Even a low status, once imprinted, will automatically
function thereafter and seem "normal". E.g., the persons
with an imprinted Bottom Dog self in this system will feel
very uncomfortable, insecure and angry if circumstances
force them into a sudden Top Dog position...just as automatically as those with imprinted Top Dog selves will feel
uncomfortable, insecure and angry if forced into a Bottom
Dog position.

196

Quantum

Psychology

197

3. T h e Semantic Time-Binding System, imprinted when
language and other symbolisms begin to "make sense" to
the growing child, deals with speech, thought (internal
speech) and making maps and models of the environment.
Since information increases logarithmically, this system
tends to produce new maps and models faster and faster
as time passes. These new reality-tunnels unleash new
technologies, which alter politics, economics and social
psychology in unpredictable ways.
While the first two systems maintain the constants of
evolution, the semantic system unleashes fractal
"chaos" — the mathematical term for high unpredictability. A time-binding semantic organism, such as the human,
departs from evolutionary norms and functions as a revolutionary agent.. .at least potentially.
To prevent the accelerated change and Unknown Results
of rapid information flow, most societies dim the timebinding function by setting heavy taboos on speech, writing and other communications. Once these taboos began to
break down — after the English and American Bills of
Rights b e c a m e widely copied — information flow
increased markedly and the world began quantum-jumping from one reality-tunnel to another with dizzying
rapidity. This so alarms conservatives (neophobes) that
undoing the Bill of Rights has always played a central role
in any conservative program.
1

4. T h e Socio-Sexual System, imprinted at puberty,
produces a characteristic Sex Role and the "self" capable of
playing that Role consistently. "Morals" get conditioned
on top of this imprint and produce the gradual "civilizing"
process by which loyalty to the family can grow into
loyalty to any member of the tribe, to higher loyalties to
nation-states etc. and even, in recent times, to an emerging

1

Under the Reagan administration, Colonel Oliver North drew
up the FEMA plan, allowing the President to suspend the Bill of
Rights at whim. Similar plans appear whenever conservatives
gain power anywhere.

198

The Non-Local Self

sense of loyalty to the human species and to the living
Earth itself.
As mentioned earlier, four later systems seem to appear
frequently in minorities and may play a larger role in our
future evolution. We will now describe these emerging
Futurist systems.
5. T h e Neurosomatic System, containing the brainneuropeptide-immunological feedbacks discussed in our
section on "mind/body" unity.
This system has existed long enough, and techniques of
activating it have appeared in so many varieties of yoga,
shamanism, hypnosis, "faith healing", etc. that almost
everybody outside the A.M.A. and CSICOP knows a little
about it and folk-lore contains many proverbs relating to it.
The statistics from Prof. Barefoot of Duke University,
showing that optimists outlive pessimists, surprise nobody
but Fundamentalist Materialists. Folk-wisdom knows
enough about neurosomatic feedbacks — without knowing the scientific details at all — that most people "try to
cheer the patient up" with some assurance that positive
thinking expresses more than wishful thinking and will
have some effect on recovery rates.
An evolutionary/revolutionary turning point, or quantum
jump, seems imminent (i.e., will probably occur before the
year 2000) because scientific study of immunological/ neuropeptide feedbacks, neurochemistry, Ericksonian and
post-Ericksonian hypnosis and Neurolinguistic Programming (NLP) seems likely to produce a "scientific yoga" or,
as I elsewhere call it, a H E A D Revolution — Hedonic
Engineering And Development. The neurosomatic healings and neurosomatic "highs" (yogic or chemical ecstasies) found intuitively or accidentally in the past will then
give way to a precise technology of staying High and
living Well.
Whole magazines already exist devoted to popularizing
the latest scientific findings in neurosomatics. A vast
public already knows much about the drugs (legal and
otherwise), the vitamins, the nutrients, the brain machines
and the computer games that allow access to neurosomatic

Quantum

Psychology

199

states. This public of HEAD explorers will grow in the next
decade, just as the information explosion in the relevant
sciences will unleash newer and better technology to unchain us
from the bondage of imprinting and open the gates to metaprogramming (selective re-imprinting).
The neurological part of this system seems centered in
the right brain hemisphere (which explains why most
verbalizations about it, until recently, have sounded like
gibberish. Elegant verbalisms only emerge after information has passed through the left hemisphere semantic
circuits.)
6. T h e Metaprogramming System, based on yoga and
scientific method, began to emerge in the West after the
scientific revolution, among various "Hermetic" societies,
c. 1500-1700 e.v. It accelerated in the 1960s when LSD
showed the majority of psychologists and neuroscientists
that rapid changes in human brain functioning could occur
easily, given the right techniques. When the government
banned LSD, the research moved into "legal" areas —
other drugs (some of which the government then added to
the Tabu list), isolation tanks, bio-feedback, etc.
Information flow in this system also seems destined to
continue accelerating, just as the 'audience" or "consumers" for this information seem to grow exponentially
every decade.
To put it simply, Dr. Timothy Leary sounded like a nut
(to most people) when he said, nearly 30 years ago, "You
can change your self as easily as you change the channel on a
TV." Now, even though Dr. Leary still suffers from media
slander and misrepresentation, the avant one-third of the
population understands very well what Leary meant,
viz —
A. No "essential self" or static ego exists;
B. We can meta-program our nervous systems for a variety
of "selves", many of them evolutionarily far in advance
of the present Terran average.
As the technology and inner arts of metaprogramming
advance, another evolutionary quantum jump will occur,

200

The Non-Local Self

even more profound than the mastery of the neurosomatic
system, which will "only" give us Longevity.
Meta-programming will give us Higher Intelligence.
(The neurological part of this system seems located in the
frontal lobes — the newest part of the brain.)
7. The Morphogenetic System contains the "selves" and
information banks of all living beings. The first descriptions of this system appear in the language of the "reincarnation" model, as the shamans and yogis who
imprinted this system could only talk-and-think about the
flood of non-ego information by assuming some transcendental ego that jumped across time from one body to
another.
Freud and Jung did a little better. Encountering information from this system in the dreams of their patients, they
posited a "racial memory" or "collective unconscious".
Neither term qualifies as operational science, but the
Freudian and Jungian records at least alerted other psychologists to pay attention to non-ego information systems.
LSD, again, accelerated progress. Finding that vast floods
of non-ego information from past ages appeared in LSD
sessions, Leary, at Harvard, posited a "neurogenetic
circuit". Grof, in Czechoslovakia, posited a "phylogenetic
unconscious" and other researchers made up other labels
or just recorded the data without trying to name it.
The first scientific model of this system appeared in
Dr. Rupert Sheldrake's A New Science of Life. Where Leary
and Grof, like Jung and Freud, assumed the non-ego
information, not known to the brain, must come from the
genes, Sheldrake, a biologist, knew that genes cannot carry
such information. He therefore posited a non-local field, like
those in quantum theory, which he named the morphogenetic
field. This field communicates between genes but cannot be
found "in" the genes — just as Johnny Carson "travels"
between TV sets but cannot be found "in" any of the TV
sets that receive him.
It will probably take a long, long time — maybe a quarter
of a century (i.e., not until around 2015) before we learn

Quantum

Psychology

201

the art and science of using the morphogenetic system for
fun and profit.
Nonetheless, those who have the most experience of this
system all seem to agree with Jung (and Leary): this information system contains not only memories of the past but
distinct trajectories of the future.
The morphogenetic system may serve as a kind of evolutionary "radar" -preparing us for future quantum jumps in
consciousness by showing us the records of past mutations.
8. The Non-Local Quantum System (described by modern physics in the last chapter) appears in the reports of a
few shamans, yogis and poets in almost every century
since the dawn of history. Parapsychologists have made
the beginnings of a scientific study of how this non-spatiotemporal system interacts with our other "selves", but
largely lacked the operational vocabulary to make their
work precise and scientifically crisp. The recent d e v e l o p
ments in quantum mechanics now open the way to much
more rapid progress in understanding "paranormal" and
"transcendental" states.
When the "self" operates on the non-local system it
becomes a different "self" again, just as always happens
whenever we move up from one of these systems to
another. The non-local "self" — beyond time and space —
and also beyond "mind" and "matter" — has not yet
survived translation into left-brain linear verbalism. It
transcends all either/ors and, as Buddhists know, we
cannot even properly call it a "self".
The Chinese, who seem to have had more experience
with this system than anybody else (more than the Hindus,
even) define non-local experience in negatives — "not
mind", "not self" "not doing", "not existence", even "not
non-existence".
The same super-synergy appears in Dr. Bohm's attempts
to describe his implicate order in words. However clear his
math, his words begin to sound Chinese when he says the
implicate order does not consist of "mind" but that it has "mindlike qualities."

The Non-Local Self

202

Obviously, it will take us at least 50 years to get a scientific handle on this level of quantum psychology.
Meanwhile, we at least have learned from the Copenhagenists that whatever model we make of non-local
experience, the model will always contain less than the
experience itself.
That should save us from the dogmatism, and the gibbering incoherence, of most writers who have tried to discuss
the non-local Self.
I would consider it the height of intellectual laziness and
mental incompetence to invoke the word "God" to cover
the limitations of my imagination and vocabulary. Instead,
I will conclude with the wise words of Aleister Crowley.
When asked to define the Tao he said,

The result of subtracting the universe
from itself.

FROM ROBERT ANTON WILSON
COSMIC TRIGGER I
final Secret of the HCuminati
The book that made it all happen! Explores
Sirius, Synchronicities, and Secret
Societies. Wilson has been called "One of
the leading thinkers of the Modern Age."
"A 21st Century Renaissance Man.
...funny, optimistic and wise..."
—The Denver Post
ISBN 1-56184-003-3

COSMIC TRIGGER II
^Dotvn to 'Earth
In this, the second book of the Cosmic
Trigger trilogy, Wilson explores the
incredible llluminati-based synchronicities
that have taken place since his ground­
breaking masterpiece was first published.
Second Revised Edition!
"Hilarious... multi-dimensional... a laugh a
paragraph."
—The Los Angeles Times
ISBN 1-56184-011-4

COSMIC TRIGGER III
Щ Life After <Deatfi
Wilson's observations about the premature
announcement of his death, plus religious
fanatics, secret societies, quantum physics,
black magic, pompous scientists, Orson
Welles, Madonna and the Vagina of Nuit.
"A SUPER-GENIUS... He has written
everything I was afraid to write."
—Dr. John Lilly, psychologist
ISBN 1-56184-112-9

FROM ROBERT ANTON WILSON
PROMETHEUS RISING
Readers have been known to get
angry, cry, laugh, even change
their entire lives. Practical tech­
niques to break free of one's
'reality tunnels'. A very important
book, now in its eighth printing.
"Prometheus Rising is one of that
rare category of modern works
which intuits the next stage of
human evolution... Wilson is one
of the leading thinkers of the
Modern age."
—Barbara Marx Hubbard
ISBN 1-56184-056-4

QUANTUM PSYCHOLOGY

Robert Anton Wilson's

9fow 'Brain Software, 'Programs
<Уои & Jour World
The book for the 21 st Century.
Picks up where Prometheus
Rising left off. Some say it's
materialistic, others call it scien­
tific and still others insist it's
mystical. It's all of these—and
none.
Second Revised Edition!
"Here is a Genius with a Gee!"
—Brian Aldiss, The Guardian
"What great physicist hides
behind the mask of Wilson?"
—New Scientist
ISBN 1-56184-071-8

QUANTUM
PSYCHOLOGY
Now Brain Software Program* You <£ Your World

FROM ROBERT ANTON WILSON
ISHTAR RISING
'Wfw the Qodd&ss 'Went to Jlettand
'What to T.Tqject %{рги That She 's
%еШгшп£
The Return of the Goddess. Wilson provides a new slant on this provocative topic.
Exciting, suggestive, and truly passionate.
First published by Playboy Press as The
Book of the Breast. Updated and revised
for the '90s. All new illustrations.
ISBN 1-56184-109-9

SEX, DRUGS & MAGICK
Я Journey 'Beyond Limits
Both Sex and Drugs are fascinating and
dangerous subjects in these times. First
published by Playboy Press, Sex and Drugs
is the definitive work on this important and
controversial topic.
"Wilson pokes and prods our miscon­
ceptions, prejudices and ignorance."
— Ray Tuckman, KPFK Radio
ISBN 1-56184-001-7

THE NEW INQUISITION
Irrational 'Rationalism &
The Citadel of Science
Wilson dares to confront the disease of our
time which he calls 'Fundamentalist Materi­
alism'. "I am opposing the Fundamentalism,
not the Materialism. The book is deliber­
ately shocking because I do not want its
ideas to seem any less stark or startling
than they are..."
ISBN 1-56184-002-5

FROM ROBERT ANTON WILSON
WILHELM REICH IN HELL
Foreword by C. S. Hyatt, Ph.D.
and Donald Holmes, M.D.
Inspired by the U. S. government
seizure and burning of the books
and papers of the world famous
psychiatrist Dr. Wilhelm Reich.
"No President, Academy, Court of
Law, Congress, or Senate on this
earth has the knowledge or
power to decide what will be the
knowledge of tomorrow."
"Erudite, witty and genuinely
scary..."
—Publishers Weekly
ISBN 1-56184-108-0

ROBERT
ANTON
WILSON'S

WILHELM
REICH
IN
HELL
fOROVORD BY
Christopher S. Hyatt, PhJB.
Donald Holmes. M.D.

COINCIDANCE
Я tfeadTest
The spelling of the title is not a
mistake. Dance through Religion
for the Hell of It, The Physics of
Synchronicity, James Joyce and
Finnegan's Wake, The Godfather
and the Goddess, The Poet as
Early Warning Radar and much
much more...
"Wilson managed to reverse
every mental polarity in me, as if I
had been pulled through infinity."
—Philip K. Dick, author
of Blade Runner
ISBN 1-56184-004-1

FROM ROBERT ANTON WILSON
REALITY IS WHAT YOU
CAN GET AWAY WITH
What is Humphrey Bogart doing
in a movie with Popeye, George
Bush and Elvis Presley? That's
what the archaeologists of the
future are trying to puzzle out.
Now you, too, can inspect this
outrageous cinematic fabrication
set in a time very like our own ...
"A fun romp ... the best screen is
inside your head, just waiting to
have this rollicking adventure
projected on it."
—Mike Gunderloy Factsheet Five
ISBN 1-56184-080-7

THE WALLS CAME
TUMBLING DOWN
"The title refers not only to the
walls of Jericho in the Bible fable
but also to the tunnel-walls of the
labyrinth of Minos in the Greek
myth, which hid Theseus and the
Monster from each other for a
long while before their final
confrontation. Of course, I also
had in mind the walls of our
individual reality-tunnels..."
"With his humorous rapier,
Wilson pokes and prods our
misconceptions, prejudices and
ignorance. A quantum banquet."
—Ray Tuckman, KPFK Radio
ISBN 1-56184-091-2

The Walls
Came
Tumbling
Down

C5

ROBERT A N T O N W I L S O N

