PROMETHEUS RISING
Robert Anton Wilson
Introduced by Israel Regardie
NEW FALCON PUBLICATIONS
TEMPE, ARIZONA U.S.A.
CONTENTS
Preface to the Second Edition 11
Introduction 17
1. The Thinker & The Prover 23
2. Hardware & Software: The Brain & Its Programs 33
3. The Oral Bio-Survival Circuit 45
4. The Anal Emotional Territorial Circuit 61
5. Dickens & Joyce: The Two-Circuit Dialectic 85
6. The Time-Binding Semantic Circuit 93
7. The Time-Binding Dialectic: Acceleration & Deceleration
105
8 The "Moral" Socio-Sexual Circuit 121
9. Mindwashing & Brain Programming 149
10. How To Brain-Wash Friends & Robotize People 161
11. The Holistic Neurosomatic Circuit 177
12. The Collective Neurogenetic Circuit 195
13. Introduction to the Metaprogramming Circuit 207
14. The Meta-Programming Circuit 217
15. Different Models & Different Muddles 227
16. The Snafu Principle 239
17. Quantum Evolution 253
18. The Non-Local Quantum Circuit 265
19. Prometheus Rising 271
Appendix 283
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION
Screw the government!—
Legends of the Fall
Screw the middle class!
— Evita
Like most of my books, this text emerged only partly from
my conscious design and partly from suspicious accidents.
It actually began as a Ph.D. dissertation called "The
Evolution of Neuro-Sociological Circuits: A Contribution to
the Sociobiology of Consciousness," which I wrote in 197879 for an alternative university called Paideia. At that time,
Paideia ranked as State Approved, the highest rating given
to alternative universities in California, where we have
alternatives to everything and the state feels required to
classify the alternatives on a scale of "experimental" to
totally bonkers. Alas, Paideia, having achieved relative
respectability as an "alternative," later joined with a much
more radical and Utopian outfit, Hawthorn University, and
lost its top rank among counter-culture educational
contraptions in California, falling from Approved to
Authorized, a much lower rating. The whole megilla then
joined into several flakey outfits loosely allied, none of
which were recognized at all by the state, which suited the
new honchos perfectly, since they did not recognize the
state either.
In Ireland in 1982, stuck with a dissertation which I liked a
lot and a Ph.D. diploma which, due to the collapse of
Paideia, looked less impressive, I decided to rewrite the
manuscript in more commercial form. The first change
consisted of removing all the footnotes (about two of them
per sentence) which gave the original a truly academic stink
but would annoy the average reader. Then I expressed
myself a little more bluntly (and perhaps snidely) in many
places, adding much to the humor and nothing to the good
taste. I also wrote a few more chapters, created all the
exercises, and sketched out diagrams for the illustrations.
I then, with craft and cunning, removed most of the
references to Dr. Timothy Leary from the early parts of the
book and only let his name begin to appear frequently after
about the middle. I had good reason, based on experience,
to feel rather strongly that, just as Dr. Tim was blacklisted
by Establishment publishers at that time, any book openly
and blatantly based largely on his ideas would also get
thrown in the junk heap.
I thought I now had a "popular" book, and maybe I almost
did. The first publisher to whom I submitted it, Jeremy
Tarcher, held it for a full year of meditation before rejecting
it; his only explanation for the rejection concerned the

mixture of technologese and "counter culture" slang that
has since become my most frequent style in nonfiction. (It's
based on the way I actually speak.) When I tried Falcon
next, they accepted it within 48 hours, and I received the
advance check within the next 48 hours.
"Oh frabjous day!"
A month later, I heard from Tarcher again: he had changed
his mind and decided he wanted the book after all. I was in
one of my periods of acute poverty then (something that
happens periodically to all freelance writers) and it was with
great effort that I refrained from telling Mr. Tarcher to go
fuck himself. I just told him I had a contract with another
publisher.
With Falcon as publisher, I
then inserted the
acknowledgments page, giving Leary the credit he deserved
right up front, and added a dedication to him. Falcon, as I
expected, did not object. Falcon has always served as an
alternative to Establishment publishing, just as Paideia once
served as a similar alternative to the academic
Establishment.
Prometheus was one of Falcon's first books and, I think, the
first done with computerized typesetting; as usual with
such pioneering efforts, it emerged with a phalanx of typos
that have embarrassed me considerably over the years.
(When the San Francisco Chronicle first computerized they
had similar problems.
I remember one story in which the Chief of Police,
denouncing drugs, rambled off into a sentence about the
thrill of meeting Mickey Mouse and Goofy. I assume that
line came from another story but it made the Chief sound
as if he had gotten into some weird chemicals himself.) In
this edition, I have corrected these errors, where I could
find them; I know too much now to think I found all of
them. (Wilson's Tenth Law: no matter how many times a
writer proofs a book, hostile critics will always find at least
one error that he missed.)
I have also updated every place where I thought updating
seemed necessary. I even added a few new ideas (which, of
course, seem brilliant to me just because they are new) and
some new jokes and generally gave the text a badlyneeded face-lift. It is still one of my favorite books, and
seems to rank high in the estimation of most of my fans.
In Germany-Switzerland-Austria in the late 1980s, three
German versions existed simultaneously—a deluxe edition
from Sphinx Verlag of Zurich, a mass-market paperback
from Rowalt Verlag of Hamburg, and an even cheaper
pirate edition from the busy troglodytes of the unterwelt.
The last, of course, paid no royalties but, by indicating that
I had three audiences at three economic levels, persuaded
me feel like a very popular writer in Mitteleuropa.
As I contemplate this tenth printing of a "far out" or
"freaked out" book that began its career back in 1978, I
feel only mildly embarrassed by the predictions that proved
over-optimistic. (I have revised them, of course, in keeping
with my current knowledge and best guesses). I feel much
more astonished, and pleased, that many of the predictions
now seem much less shocking than when I first published
them. Indeed, the wildest and most "Utopian" future-scans
in here are precisely the ones that have had the greatest
scientific support in the 1990s. To see two decades ahead,
even in a few areas, counts as some sort of success in the
Futurism game. And every bulletin from the embattled MIR
space station reminds me that if my space forecasts
projected "too much too soon," part of what I expected
does in fact already exist and the rest is obviously evolving.
I feel more chagrined about my lyrical evocation of
Intelligence Intensification. In the 1970s, I simply did not
recognize the extent to which the 1960s "youth revolution"
had terrified our ruling Elite, or that they would try to
prevent future upsurges of radical Utopianism by
deliberately "dumbing down" the educational system. What
they have produced, the so-called Generation X, must rank
as not only the most ignorant but also the most paranoid
and depressive kids ever to infest our Republic.
I agree with outlaw radio star Travis Hipp that the paranoia
and depression result inevitably from the ignorance. These
kids not only don't know anything; they don't even want to
know.1
They only realize, vaguely, that somebody has screwed
them out of something, but they don't have enough zest or

bile to try to find out who screwed them and what they
were screwed out of.
Fortunately, this Age of Stupidity cannot last very long.
Already, most people know that if you want a good TV or
VCR, you buy Japanese; for a good car, Japanese or
German, etc.
Eventually, in order to compete, the Elite will have to allow
a bit more education for American youth, before we sink
fully to the level of a Third World nation.
The other day I saw a film called The Edge, which I
regarded as the best thing to come out of Hollywood since
The Silence of the Lambs. Perhaps not coincidentally, this
flic also starred Anthony Hopkins. In one scene, Hopkins
and his co-star, Alec Baldwin, seem in an absolutely
hopeless situation, lost in the Arctic, stalked by a hungry
bear, without weapons, seemingly doomed. Baldwin
collapses, and Hopkins has a magnificent monologue,
talking Baldwin out of his despair. The speech runs,
roughly, like this: "Did you know you can make fire out of
ice? You can, you know. Fire out of ice. Think about it. Fire
out of ice. Think. Think."
This riddle has both a pragmatic and symbolic (alchemical)
answer. The pragmatic answer you can find in the film,
explicitly; and it might prove useful if you ever get lost in
the north woods; and the alchemical, or Zen Buddhist,
answer is also in the film, implicitly, and only perceptible to
those who understand
One of the spokespersons for Gen X, named Shann Nix, has a
talk show on KGO, one of the most powerful radio signals on
the West Coast. On one show, she announced that the Vatican
is not a State.
On another, she proclaimed that Jury Nullification was a recent
invention by the far right. Etc.

the dense character Hopkins plays in the story. It might
prove useful whenever despair seems to overwhelm you.
So, to those who at the end of this book still can't
understand or sWy"mFhiopre aw tohauistz oetfh wiactie
t.Ph Tr omhmiyne kNt.h iTeeuhtzsin sgkc.hu"eya ann yde
wa-hsayy dinidg ,h Ie qguiovtee uasg afiinre in the first
place? Robert Anton Wilson
On the Internet at http://www.rawilson.com
INTRODUCTION
By Israel Regardie
The ability to create a synthesis of diverse points of view,
scientific and social and philosophical, is a rare gift. Not
many are there who dare even to attempt such a task.
Imagine anyone trying to make sense of an amalgam of
Timothy Leary's eight neurological circuits, Gurdjieff’s self
observation exercises, Korzybski's general semantics,
Aleister Crowley's magical theorems, the several disciplines
of Yoga, Christian Science, relativity and modern quantum
mechanics,
and many other approaches to understanding the world
around us! A man is required with an almost encyclopedic
education, an incredibly flexible mind, insights as sharp as
those whom he is trying synthesize and mirabile dictu, a
wonderful sense of humor.
For several years—ever since I first became familiar with
the writings of Robert Anton Wilson—I have been struck
with his ever-present sense of bubbling humor and the wide
scope of his intellectual interests. Once I was even so
presumptuous as to warn him in a letter that his humor was
much too good to waste on hoi polloi who generally
speaking would not understand it and might even resent it.
However this effervescent lightness of heart became even
more apparent in Cosmic Trigger and more latterly in the
trilogy of Schrodinger's Cat. I have sometimes wondered
whether his extraordinarily wide range of intellectual roving
is too extensive and therefore perplexing to the average
reader. Be that as it may, the humor and synthesis are
even more marked in this brilliant ambitious piece of
writing, Prometheus Rising.
Even if your reading has already made you familiar with
some of the concepts employed by Wilson in this book,
nonetheless his elucidation even of the simplest, the most
basic, is illuminating.
At this moment, I am referring to the "imprint" theory
which he makes considerable use of. Much of the same is

true of his references to and explanation of Leary's eight
neurological circuits.
We become familiar with them all over again, as if they had
not been introduced to us before.
Moreover I love the subtle and almost invisible use of
mystical dogma that permeates all his writings. For
example, consider the opening of Chapter Six. It quotes a
particularly meaningful sentence from William S. Burroughs.
There is no mention—nor need there be—of any anterior
teaching regarding this Law of Three, as it may be called.
But one doctrine that emanated from a medieval mystical
school philosophizes that there are always two contending
forces—for the sake of convenience labeled Severity and
Mildness—with a third that always reconciles them. It is
paramount to this doctrine, which has been stated and
stated again in a dozen or more different ways throughout
the centuries, culminating finally in the idea enunciated by
Burroughs and of course used by Wilson.
There are dozens of similar seeds of wisdom sown
throughout Prometheus Rising that are bound to have a
seminal effect wherever and whenever the book is read.
This is one of the many virtues of Wilson's book; it will
leave its mark on all those who read it—and those seeds
will surely take root and bloom in the most unlikely minds—
as well as in the more prosaic. Tarot advocates will find the
most unusual and illuminating interpretations of some of
their favorite cards when he falls back on the basic neural
circuits. I found them all illuminating as providing a new
viewpoint which had to be integrated into my general view
of such matters.
The only area where I was reluctantly inclined to be at odds
with Wilson was in what I considered to be his addiction to
a Utopia—which he eloquently enough expresses as "the
birth pangs of a cosmic Prometheus rising out of the long
nightmare of domesticated primate history." The history of
mankind is also the history of one Utopia after another,
being enunciated with enthusiasm and vigor, calling upon
all the facts of faith and science (as they existed at that
moment in space-time) to corroborate the fantasy. A
decade or maybe a century elapse—and the fantasy is no
more. The Utopia has gone down the drain to join all the
other Utopias of earlier primates. However, I sincerely hope
that Wilson is right in this case.
Now I am not unmindful of the fact that the Utopia of which
Wilson speaks, echoing many of the best scientific and
philosophic minds of our day, is a distinct possibility at
some time, but that it could occur within the next decade
seems rather improbable to me. It seems improbable of
course only in terms of the current state of world
enlightenment, or lack of it, and because it implies a
"miracle" occurring in vast numbers of living primates
simultaneously—whatever semantic theories are involved in
the meaning of the word "simultaneously."
Anyway, this is a minor point considering the seminal
brilliance of the greater part of this enlightening book.
In a previously written book, Wilson wrote that [in] 1964,
Dr. John S. Bell published a demonstration that still has the
physicists reeling. What Bell seemed to prove was that
quantum effects are 'non-local' in Bohm's sense; that is,
they are not just here or there, but both. What this
apparently means is that space and time are only real to
our mammalian sense organs; they are not really real.
This writing reminds me so much of the Hindu concept of
Indra's Net. The latter is sometimes described as being a
great net extending throughout the whole universe,
vertically to represent time, horizontally to represent space.
At each point where the threads of this Indra's net cross
one another is a diamond or a crystal bead, the symbol of a
single existence. Each crystal bead reflects on its shining
surface not only every other bead in the whole net of Indra
but every single reflection of every reflection of every other
bead upon each individual bead—countless, endless
reflections of one another. We could also liken it to a single
candle being placed in the centre of a large hall. Around
this hall tens of mirrors are arranged in such a manner that,
when the candle was lit, one saw not only its reflection in
each individual mirror, but also the reflections of the
reflections in every other mirror repeated ad infinitum.
One of the several virtues of Prometheus Rising is that
Wilson using Leary's neurological circuits believes that a

new philosophical paradigm is about due. In reality, this is
really Wilson's answer to my proposed criticism of his
Utopian fantasy. It may not be within a decade that we
shall realize whether it is true or false. But that is not
important. What is clear is that thanks to the insights of
many modern thinkers, major new intellectual findings do
not come solely from the slow drip and grind of tiny new
discoveries, or from new theories simply being added to our
present armamentarium of time-honoured truisms. Rather,
quantum leaps, in outlook ala Teilhard de Chardin, occur
with a fantastic jump to a new horizon or level of
perception. This insight usually comes from a revolutionary
overview which realigns or transforms former thinking into
a new and more enlightening frame of reference.
This dovetails with his equally fascinating thesis that
everything alive is really alive in the fullest and most
dynamic sense of the word. It twitches, searches, throbs,
organizes and seems aware of an upward movement.
Twitches seems almost the right word, recalling to mind the
myoclonisms of Wilhelm Reich's vegetotherapy which, at
sometime, are infinitely disturbing to the patient on the
couch who, because of them, feels he is falling apart, being
shattered into a thousand pieces. He isn't really. It is as
though the organism were gathering itself together for an
upward or forward leap into the unknown, to a higher order
of looking at things.
The transition to a higher order of functioning—or hooking
on to a higher neural circuit—is often accompanied by
considerable anxiety or a turbulence in personal life which
seems as if the organism were falling apart or breaking up.
This phenomenon of instability is really the way that every
living organism—societies, human primates, chemical
solutions, etc.—shakes itself, as it were, by myoclonisms or
similar convulsions into new combinations and permutations
for higher and new levels of development.
So perhaps the space-time Utopia of a new area of primate
exploration has some validity after all, as indicating that the
more vigorous the disturbance or myoclonism the greater
the quantum jump into a higher neurological circuit. This is
one reason why I firmly believe that the transition to the
next spiral will not be smooth nor without much suffering
and chaos.
All of which suggests, with Wilson and Leary, that the brain
is considerably more sophisticated than any of us previously
had imagined. It is quite possible that it operates in
dimensions so beyond the lower neural circuitry that it
occasionally "throws us a bone" every day so that we can
continue to function in the make-believe world of everyday
status quo. In the meantime, it is a multidimensional
structure at ease in far more than the narrow primate world
we have been programmed to live in. It may interpret
waves and frequencies from other dimensions, realms of
"light," of meaningful unrestricted patterned reality— that
are here and now—and which transcend our present myopic
tunnel
realities
of
our
rigid
perceptions
and
conceptualizations of space and time.
If so, then the title of this book Prometheus Rising is
representative of more than a catchy title to a profound
fascinating book. It becomes a title, instead, to the very
attempt which we are now making to reach beyond
ourselves with a quantum leap into a new world which has
been envisaged only by a very few.
Wilson is one of this group who are preparing themselves
and if we allow them, the rest of us, to take our place in the
New Aeon.
I will close with a quote from Wilson, We are all giants,
raised by pygmies, who have learned to walk with a
perpetual mental crouch. Unleashing our full stature—our
total brain power—is what this book is all about.
Israel Regardie
Phoenix Arizona
July 1983
WARNING
Wilson describes himself as a 'guerrilla ontologist,'
signifying his intent to attack language and knowledge the
way terrorists attack their targets: to jump out from the
shadows for an unprovoked attack, then slink back and hide
behind a hearty belly laugh.
— Robert Sheaffer, The Skeptical Inquirer

CHAPTER ONE
THE THINKER & THE PROVER
All that we are is the result of all that we have thought. It is
founded on thought. It is based on thought.
— Buddha, The Dhammapada

William James, father of American psychology, tells of
meeting an old lady who told him the Earth rested on the
back of a huge turtle.
"But, my dear lady," Professor James asked, as politely as
possible, "what holds up the turtle?"
"Ah," she said, "that's easy. He is standing on the back of
another turtle."
"Oh, I see," said Professor James, still being polite. "But
would you be so good as to tell me what holds up the
second turtle?"
"It's no use, Professor," said the old lady, realizing he was
trying to lead her into a logical trap. "It's turtles-turtlesturtles, all the way!"
Don't be too quick to laugh at this little old lady. All human
minds work on fundamentally similar principles. Her
universe was a little bit weirder than most but it was built
up on the same mental principles as every other universe
people have believed in.
As Dr. Leonard Orr has noted, the human mind behaves as
if it were divided into two parts, the Thinker and the Prover.
The Thinker can think about virtually anything. History
shows that it can think the earth is suspended on the backs
of infinite turtles or that the Earth is hollow, or that the
Earth is floating in space;1 comparative religion and
philosophy show that the Thinker can regard itself as
mortal, as immortal, as both mortal and immortal (the
reincarnation model) or even as nonexistent (Buddhism). It
can think itself into living in a Christian universe, a Marxist
universe, a scientific-relativistic universe, or a Nazi
universe—among many possibilities.
As psychiatrists and psychologists have often observed
(much to the chagrin of their medical colleagues), the
Thinker can think itself sick, and can even think itself well
again.
The Prover is a much simpler mechanism. It operates on
one law only: Whatever the Thinker thinks, the Prover
proves.
To cite a notorious example which unleashed incredible
horrors earlier in this century, if the Thinker thinks that all
Jews are rich, the Prover will prove it. It will find evidence
that the
1.- Millions of people believe that (including the present
author).

poorest Jew in the most run-down ghetto has hidden money
somewhere. Similarly, Feminists are able to believe that all
men, including the starving wretches who live and sleep on
the streets, are exploiting all women, including the Queen
of England.
If the Thinker thinks that the sun moves around the earth,
the Prover will obligingly organize all perceptions to fit that
thought; if the Thinker changes its mind and decides the

earth moves around the sun, the Prover will reorganize the
evidence.
If the Thinker thinks "holy water" from Lourdes will cure its
lumbago, the Prover will skillfully orchestrate all signals
from the glands, muscles, organs etc. until they have
organized themselves into good health again
Of course, it is fairly easy to see that other people's minds
operate this way; it is comparatively much harder to
become aware that one's own mind is working that way
also.
It is believed, for instance, that some men are more
"objective" than others. (One seldom hears this about
women...)
Businessmen
are
allegedly
hard-nosed,
pragmatic and "objective" in this sense. A brief examination
of the dingbat politics most businessmen endorse will
quickly correct that impression.
Scientists, however, are still believed to be objective. No
study of the lives of the great scientists will confirm this.
They were as passionate, and hence as prejudiced, as any
assembly of great painters or great musicians. It was not
just the Church but also the established astronomers of the
time who condemned Galileo. The majority of physicists
rejected Einstein's Special Relativity Theory in 1905.
Einstein himself would not accept anything in quantum
theory after 1920 no matter how many experiments
supported it. Edison's commitment to direct current (DC)
electrical generators led him to insist alternating current
(AC) generators were unsafe for years after their safety had
been proven to everyone else.'
Edison's pigheadedness on this matter was partly the result of
his jealousy against Nikola Tesla, inventor of AC generators.
Tesla, on the other hand, refused the Nobel Prize when it was
offered to him and Edison jointly because he refused to appear
on the same platform with Edison. Both of these geniuses were
only capable of "objectivity" and science in certain limited
laboratory conditions. If you

Science achieves, or approximates, objectivity not because
the individual scientist is immune from the psychological
laws that govern the rest of us, but because scientific
method—a group creation—eventually overrides individual
prejudices, in the long run. To take a notorious example
from the 1960s, there was a point when three research
groups had "proven" that LSD causes chromosome damage,
while three other groups had "proven" that LSD has no
effect on the chromosomes. In each case, the Prover had
proved what the Thinker thought. Right now, there are, in
physics, 7 experiments that confirm a very controversial
concept known as Bell's Theorem, and two experiments
that refute Bell's Theorem. In the area of extra-sensory
perception, the results are uniform after more than a
century: everybody who sets out to prove that ESP exists
succeeds, and everybody who sets out to prove that ESP
does not exist also succeeds.
"Truth" or relative truth emerges only after decades of
experiments by thousands of groups all over the world.

think you have a higher "objectivity quotient" than either of
them, why haven't you been nominated for a Nobel prize?

In the long run, we are hopefully approximating closer and
closer to "objective Truth" over the centuries.
In the short run, Orr's law always holds:
Whatever the Thinker thinks, the Prover will prove.'

And if the Thinker thinks passionately enough, the Prover
will prove the thought so conclusively that you will never
talk a person out of such a belief, even if it is something as
remarkable as the notion that there is a gaseous vertebrate
of astronomical heft ("GOD") who will spend all eternity
torturing people who do not believe in his religion.
EXERCISES
Sad as it is to say, you never understand anything by
merely reading a book about it. That's why every science
course includes laboratory experiments, and why every
consciousness liberation movement demands practice of
yogas, meditations, confrontation techniques, etc. in which
the ideas are tested in the laboratory of your own nervous
system.
The reader will absolutely not understand this book unless
he or she does the exercises given at the end of each
chapter.
To explore the Thinker and the Prover, try the following:
1. Visualize a quarter vividly, and imagine vividly that you
are going to find the quarter on the street. Then, look for
the quarter every time you take a walk, meanwhile
continuing to visualize it.
See how long it takes you to find the quarter.
2. Explain the above experiment by the hypothesis of
"selective attention"—that is, believe there are lots of lost
quarters everywhere and you were bound to find one by
continually looking.
Go looking for a second quarter.
3. Explain the experiment by the alternative "mystical"
hypothesis that "mind controls everything." Believe that
you made the quarter manifest in this universe. Go looking
for a second quarter.
If the reader is a scientist, be not alarmed. This refers not to
you but only to those benighted fools in the opposite camp who
refuse to recognize that your theory is the only reasonable one.
Of course.

4. Compare the time it takes to find the second quarter
using the first hypothesis (attention) with the time it takes
using the second hypothesis (mind-over-matter).
5. With your own ingenuity, invent similar experiments and
each time compare the two theories—"selective attention"
(coincidence)
vs.
"mind
controls
everything"
(psychokinesis).
6. Avoid coming to any strong conclusions prematurely. At
the end of a month, re-read this chapter, think it over
again, and still postpone coming to any dogmatic
conclusion. Believe it possible that you do not know
everything yet, and that you might have something still to
learn.
7. Convince yourself1 (if you are not already convinced)
that you are ugly, unattractive and dull. Go to a party in
that frame of mind. Observe how people treat you.
8. Convince yourself (if you are not already convinced) that
you are handsome, irresistible and witty. Go to a party in
that frame of mind. Observe how people treat you.
9. This is the hardest of all exercises and comes in two
parts.
First, observe closely and dispassionately two dear friends
and two relative strangers. Try to figure out what their
Thinkers think, and how their Provers methodically set
about proving it.
Second, apply the same exercise to yourself.
If you think you have learned the lessons of these exercises
in less than six months, you haven't really been working at
them.
With real work, in six months you should be just beginning
to realize how little you know about everything.
10. Believe it possible that you can float off the ground and
fly by merely willing it. See what happens.
If this exercise proves as disappointing to you as it has to
me, try number 11 below, which is never disappointing.
11. Believe that you can exceed all your previous ambitions
and hopes in all areas of your life.
"Believe" or "convince yourself mean to do what an actor does:
pretend until the pretense begins to feel real. Or, as Jazz
musicians say: "Fake it until you make it."

ALL MODELS ARE SUBJECT TO REVISION AS THIS BOOK
GOES ALONG. THEY ARE ALSO SUBJECT TO REVISION
AFTER THE BOOK IS FINISHED — BY THE AUTHOR OR BY
THE READER

We will, throughout this book, consider the human brain a
kind of bio-computer—an electro-colloidal computer, as
distinct from the electronic or solid-state computers which
exist outside our heads.
Please note carefully and long remember that we have not
said that the human brain is a computer. The Aristotelian
idea that to understand something you must know what it
is has been abandoned in one science after another, for the
pragmatic reason that the simple word "is" introduces so
many metaphysical assumptions that we can argue forever
about them. In the most advanced sciences, such as
mathematical physics, nobody talks about what anything is
anymore. They talk about what model (or map) can best be
used to understand whatever we are investigating.
In general, this scientific habit of avoiding "is" can be
profitably extended to all areas of thought. Thus, when you
read anywhere that A is B, it will clarify matters if you
translate this as "A can be considered as, or modeled by,
B."
When we say A is B, we are saying that A is only what it
appears within our field of study or our area of
specialization.
This is saying too much. When we say A can be considered
as B, or modeled by B, we are saying exactly as much as
we have a right to say, and no more.
We therefore say that the brain can be considered as a
computer; but we do not say it is a computer.
The brain appears to be made up of matter in electrocolloidal suspension (protoplasm).
Colloids are pulled together, toward a condition of gel, by
their surface tensions. This is because surface tensions pull
all glue-like substances together.
Colloids are also, conversely, pushed apart, toward a
condition of sol, by their electrical charges. This is because
their electrical charges are similar, and similar electrical
charges always repel each other.
In the equilibrium between gel and sol, the colloidal
suspension maintains its continuity and life continues. Move
the suspension too far toward gel, or too far toward sol,
and life ends.
Any chemical that gets into the brain, changes the gel-sol
balance, and "consciousness" is accordingly influenced.
Thus, potatoes are, like LSD, "psychedelic"—in a milder
way. The changes in consciousness when one moves from a
vegetarian diet to an omnivorous diet, or vice versa, are
also "psychedelic."
Since "What the Thinker thinks, the Prover proves," all of
our ideas are psychedelic. Even without experimenting with
diet or drugs, whatever you think you should see, you will
see—unless it is physically impossible in this universe.

Tentative Model #1: The perceived universe is a mixture of
the "real universe" and our own "Thinker"—proving its pet
beliefs.

CHAPTER TWO
HARDWARE & SOFTWARE: THE BRAIN & ITS
PROGRAMS
We, as a species, exist in a world in which exist a myriad of
data points.1 Upon these matrices of points we
superimpose a structure2 and the world makes sense to us.
The pattern of the structure originates within our biological
and sociological properties.3
— Persinger and Lafreniere, Space-Time Transients and
Unusual Events
1 In our terminology, these data points are events or actions,
i.e. verbs, not nouns.
2 In our terminology, models or maps, static things; nouns not
verbs.
3 In our terminology, brain hardware and software.

THE BRAIN IS NOT A COMPUTER
But the brain can be modeled by a computer
Pleasure
pain
(Input)
Programs Running
Approach
Flee
(Output)

All experience is a muddle, until we make a model to
explain it. The model can clarify the muddles, but the
model is never the muddle itself. "The map is not the
territory"; the menu does not taste like the meal.

Every computer consists of two aspects, known as
hardware
and
software.
(Software
here
includes
information).
The hardware in a solid-state computer is concrete and
localized, consisting of central processing unit, display,
keyboard, external disk drive, CD-ROM, floppies, etc.—all
the parts you can drag into Radio Shack for repair if the
computer is malfunctioning.
The software consists of programs that can exist in many
forms, including the totally abstract. A program can be "in"
the computer in the sense that it is recorded in the CPU or
on a disk which is hitched up to the computer. A program
can also exist on a piece of paper, if I invented it myself, or
in a manual, if it is a standard program; in these cases, it is
not "in" the computer but can be put "in" at any time. But a
program can be even more tenuous than that; it can exist
only in my head, if I have never written it down, or if I have
used it once and erased it.
The hardware is more "real" than the software in that you
can always locate it in space-time—if it's not in the
bedroom, somebody must have moved it to the study, etc.
On the other hand, the software is more "real" in the sense
that you can smash the hardware back to dust ("kill" the
computer) and the software still exists, and can
"materialize" or "manifest" again in a different computer.
(Any speculations about reincarnation at this point are the
responsibility of the reader, not of the author.)

In speaking of the human brain as an electro-colloidal
biocomputer, we all know where the hardware is: it is inside
the human skull. The software, however, seems to be
anywhere and everywhere. For instance, the software "in"
my brain also exists outside my brain in such forms as, say,
a book I read twenty years ago, which was an English
translation of various signals transmitted by Plato 2400
years ago. Other parts of my software are made up of the
software of Confucius, James Joyce, my second-grade
teacher, the Three Stooges, Beethoven, my mother and
father, Richard Nixon, my various dogs and cats, Dr. Carl
Sagan, and anybody and (to some extent) any-thing that
has ever impacted upon my brain. This may sound strange,
but that's the way software (or information) functions.
Of course, if consciousness consisted of nothing but this
undifferentiated tapioca of timeless, spaceless software, we
would have no individuality, no center, no Self.
We want to know, then, how out of this universal software
ocean a specific person emerges.
What the Thinker thinks, the Prover proves.
Because the human brain, like other animal brains, acts as
an electro-colloidal computer, not a solid-state computer, it
follows the same laws as other animal brains. That is, the
programs get into the brain, as electro-chemical bonds, in
discrete quantum stages.
Each set of programs consists of four basic parts:
1 . Genetic Imperatives. Totally hard-wired programs or
"instincts."
2. Imprints. These are more-or-less hard wired programs
which the brain is genetically designed to accept only at
certain points in its development. These points are known,
in ethology, as times of imprint vulnerability.
3. Conditioning. These are programs built onto the imprints.
They are looser and fairly easy to change with counterconditioning.
4. Learning. This is even looser and "softer" than
conditioning.
In general, the primordial imprint can always over-rule any
subsequent conditioning or learning. An imprint is a species

of software that has become built-in hardware, being
impressed on the tender neurons when they are peculiarly
open and vulnerable.
Imprints (software frozen into hardware) are the nonnegotiable aspects of our individuality. Out of the infinity of
possible programs existing as potential software, the
imprint establishes the limits, parameters, perimeters
within which all subsequent conditioning and learning
occurs.
YOUR HARDWARE IS LOCALIZED:
BRAIN CELLS RIGHT HERE, RIGHT NOW.

YOUR SOFTWARE IS NON-LOCAL:
POINT-EVENTS EVERYWHERE, EVERYWHEN.
Before the first imprint, the consciousness of the infant is
"formless and void"—like the universe at the beginning of
Genesis, or the descriptions of unconditioned ("enlightened"
i.e., exploded) consciousness in the mystic traditions. As
soon as the first imprint is made, structure emerges out of
the creative void.
The growing mind, alas, becomes trapped within this
structure. It identifies with the structure; in a sense, it
becomes the structure.
This entire process is analyzed in G. Spencer Brown's Laws
of Form; and Brown was writing about the foundations of
mathematics and logic. But every sensitive reader knows
that Brown is also talking about a process we have all
passed through in creating, out of an infinite ocean of
signals, those particular constructs we call "myself and "my
world." Not surprisingly, many acid-heads have said that
Brown's math is the best description ever written of an LSD
trip.
Each successive imprint complicates the software which
programs our experience and which we experience as
"reality."
Conditioning and learning build further networks onto this
bedrock of imprinted software. The total structure of this
braincircuitry makes up our map of the world. It is what our
Thinker thinks, and our Prover mechanically fits all
incoming signals to the limitations of this map.
Following Dr. Timothy Leary (with a few modifications) we
shall divide this brain hardware into eight circuits for
convenience.
("For convenience" means that this is the best map I know
at present. I assume it will be replaced by a better map
within 10 or 15 years; and in any case, the map is not the
territory.)
Four of the circuits are "antique" and conservative, they
exist in everybody (except feral children).
1. The Oral Bio-Survival Circuit. This is imprinted by the
mother or the first mothering object and conditioned by
subsequent nourishment or threat. It is primarily concerned
with sucking, feeding, cuddling, and body security. It
retreats mechanically from the noxious or predatory—or
from anything associated (by imprinting or conditioning)
with the noxious or predatory.
2. The Anal Emotional-Territorial Circuit. This is imprinted in
the "Toddling" stage when the infant rises up, walks about
and begins to struggle for power within the family
structure. This mostly mammalian circuit processes
territorial rules, emotional games, or cons, pecking order
and rituals of domination or submission.
3. The Time-Binding Semantic Circuit. This is imprinted and
conditioned by human artifacts and symbol systems. It
"handles" and "packages" the environment, classifying

everything according to the local reality tunnel. Invention,
calculation, prediction and transmitting signals across
generations are its functions.
4. The "Moral" Socio-Sexual Circuit. This is imprinted by the
first orgasm-mating experiences at puberty and is
conditioned by tribal taboos. It processes sexual pleasure,
local definitions of "right" and "wrong," reproduction, adultparental personality (sex role) and nurture of the young.
The development of these circuits as the brain evolved
through evolution, and as each domesticated primate
(human) brain recapitulates evolution in growing from
infancy to adulthood, makes possible gene-pool survival,
mammalian sociobiology (pecking order, or politics) and
transmission of culture.
The second group of four brain circuits is much newer, and
each circuit exists at present only in minorities. Where the
antique circuits recapitulate evolution-to-the-present, these
futuristic circuits ^recapitulate our future evolution.
5. The Holistic Neurosomatic Circuit. This is imprinted by
ecstatic experience, via biological or chemical yogas. It
processes neurosomatic ("mind-body") feedback loops,
somatic-sensory bliss, feeling "high," "faith-healing," etc.
Christian Science, NLP and holistic medicine consist of tricks
or gimmicks to get this circuit into action at least
temporarily; Tantra yoga is concerned with shifting
consciousness entirely into this circuit.
6. The Collective Neurogenetic Circuit. This is imprinted by
advanced yogas (bio-chemical - electrical stresses). It
processes DNA-RNA-brain feedback systems and is
"collective" in that it contains and has access to the whole
evolutionary "script," past and future. Experience of this
circuit is numinous, "mystical," mind-shattering; here dwell
the archetypes of Jung's Collective Unconscious—Gods,
Goddesses,
Demons,
Hairy
Dwarfs
and
other
personifications of the DNA programs (instincts) that
govern us.
7. The Meta-programming Circuit. This is imprinted by very
advanced yogas. It consists, in modern terms, of cybernetic
consciousness, reprogramming and reimprinting all other
circuits, even reprogramming itself, making possible
conscious choice between alternative universes or reality
tunnels.
8. The Non-Local Quantum Circuit. This is imprinted by
Shock, by "near-death" or "clinical death" experience, by
OOBEs
(out-of-body-experiences),
by
trans-time
perceptions ("precognition"), by trans-space visions (ESP),
etc. It tunes the brain into the non-local quantum
communication system suggested by physicists such as
Bohm, Walker, Sarfatti, Bell, etc.
These circuits will be explained in detail as we proceed.
EXERCISES
1. If you don't already have a computer, run out and buy
one. Then re-read this chapter.
2. To understand hardware and software are (as applied to
the human brain) perform the following meditation.
Sit in a room where you will not be disturbed for a half hour
and begin thinking, "I am sitting in this room doing this
exercise because..." and list as many of the "causes" as you
can think of.
For instance, you are doing this exercise because,
obviously, you read about it in this book. Why did you buy
this book? Did somebody recommend it? How did that
person come into your life? If you just picked the book up
in a store, why did you happen to be in just that store on
just that day?
Why do you read books of this sort—on psychology,
consciousness, evolution etc.? How did you get interested in
those fields? Who turned you on, and how long ago? What
factors in your childhood inclined you to be interested in
these subjects later?
Why are you doing this exercise in this room and not
elsewhere?
Why did you buy or rent this house or apartment? Why are
you in this city and not another? Why on this continent and
not another?
Why are you here at all—that is, how did your parents
meet?
Did they consciously decide to have a child, do you happen
to know, or were you an accident? What cities were they

born in? If in different cities, why did they move in spacetime so that their paths would intersect?
Why is this planet capable of supporting life, and why did it
produce the kind of life that would dream up an exercise of
this sort?
Repeat this exercise a few days later, trying to ask and
answer fifty questions you didn't think of the first time.
(Note that you cannot ever ask all possible questions.)
Avoid all metaphysical speculations (e.g., karma,
reincarnation, "destiny" etc.). The point of the exercise will
be mindblowing enough without introducing "occult"
theories, and it will be more startling if you carefully avoid
such overtly "mystical" speculations.
4. Pick up any household item—a spoon, a pen, a cup etc.
Perform the same exercise as above—why is it here? Who
invented it, if you can find out? How did the invention get to
this continent? Who manufactured it? Why did they
manufacture that instead of bird cages? Why did they
become manufacturers instead of musicians? Why did you
buy it? Why did you pick that object, of all the objects in
your house, for this meditation?
ANSWER QUICKLY NOW
ARE YOU YOUR HARDWARE,
OR YOUR SOFTWARE?
OR BOTH?

CHAPTER THREE
THE ORAL BIO-SURVIVAL CIRCUIT
Genes, like Leibnitz's monads, have no windows; the higher
properties of life are emergent.
— Edward Wilson, Sociobiology

Few of our ancestors were perfect ladies or gentlemen; the
majority of them were not even mammals.
Any multi-cellular organism must, if it is to survive, contain
a hard-wired bio-survival circuit, which very simply
programs an either-or choice: GO FORWARD to the
nourishing, the protective, or GO BACK, away from the
threatening, the predatory.
Any mammal hooks the bio-survival circuit to the first
imprinted bio-survival object: the teat. Bio-survival and
orality are deeply blended in all mammals, including
domesticated primates (humans). This is why, despite the
Cancer Terror, an estimated 30,000,000 Americans still
smoke cigarettes... Others chew gum (spearmint, juicy
fruit, even sugar-free: something for every taste), bite their
fingernails, gnaw their knuckles, scrunch pencil stubs, eat
more than they need (Potato chips, anyone? a Mars bar
maybe? pretzels, peanuts, cashews, do you want the
cheese and crackers with your beer, Mac? And do try the
canapes, Mrs. Miller). Some chew their lips, gobble tranks
and uppers, even munch their mustaches. What goes on in
the bedroom is known to the Kinsey Institute and anyone
who has seen a porn film.
How important is this oral imprinting? We read of a baby
giraffe whose mother was accidentally killed by a jeep
immediately after birth. The neonate, following hard-wired
genetic programs, "imprinted" the first object that roughly
fit the giraffe archetype—the jeep itself. He followed the
machine around, vocalized to it, attempted to suckle from
it, and, when adult, tried to mate with it.

Similarly, Konrad Lorenz tells of a gosling who accidentally
imprinted a ping-pong ball and spent his adult life,
indifferent to female geese, attempting to sexually mount
ping-pong balls.
As Charles Darwin noted:
In our maturer years, when an object of vision is presented
to us which bears any similitude to the form of the female
bosom...we feel a general glow of delight which seems to
influence all of our senses...
The ancients pictured the great mother goddess Diana of
Ephesus with literally dozens of breasts and St. Paul reports
hearing her worshippers chanting rapturously "Great is
Diana!"
There is virtually no great artist who has not left us a
portrait, or many portraits, of the nude female form,
especially the breasts; and even in non-human scenes,
curves are introduced wherever possible. Architects break
the Euclidean straight line to introduce such curves at the
slightest pretext—arches, Moorish domes, etc.
The curves of the suspension bridge are necessitated by
Newton's laws ("Gravity's rainbow," in Pynchon's phrase)
but, still, these double catenary curves are esthetically
pleasing for the reasons Darwin suggests. As for music—
where did we first hear it, who sang or hummed to us, and
against what part of her body were we held?
Mountain climbers are reduced, like Mallory, to saying
"Because it's there," when trying to explain their
compulsion to ascend those conic peaks.
Our eating utensils (oral gratification tools) tend to be
rounded or curved. Square plates or saucers look "campy"
or strange.
UFOs come in a variety of shapes, but the most popular are
the oval and conic.
Freudians suggest that opiate addiction is an attempt to
return to the womb. In keeping with our theory, it is more
likely that opium and its derivatives return us to the "safe
space" on the biosurvival circuit, the warm, snug place of
bio-security; opiates may trigger neuro-transmitters'
characteristic of breast-feeding.
In summary: the bio-survival circuit is DNA-programmed to
seek a comfort-safety zone around a mothering organism.
If a mother isn't present, the closet substitute in the
environment will be imprinted. For the orphan giraffe, a
four-wheeled jeep was chosen to stand in for the fourlegged mother. The gosling who could not find the round,
white body of the mother-goose fixated a round, white
ping-pong ball.
The "wiring" of this circuit, in primitive form, occurred in
the first organisms, between three and four billion years
ago. In the modern human, this structure remains in the
brain stem and in the autonomic ( "involuntary ") nervous
system, where it is interconnected with the endocrine and
other life-support systems.
This is why disturbances on this circuit act "all over the
body at
1 Neuro-transmitters are chemicals which alter the electrocolloidal balance of the brain and hence change the perceptual
field. Brain change agents.

once" and generally take the form of physical symptoms
rather than "mental" symptoms and usually get referred to
the M.D. instead of the psychiatrist.
It must be stressed that we are still in a primitive stage of
evolution and conditions on this planet are quite brutal.
Radical pediatricians insist, with good evidence, that
childbirth by conventional means in a conventional hospital
is almost always traumatic for the newborn—creates a bad
imprint, in our language.
Our child-rearing methods are far from ideal also, adding
bad conditioning on top of bad imprinting. And the general
violence of our societies to date—including wars,
revolutions, civil wars and the "undeclared civil war" of the
predatory criminal class in every "civilized" nation—keeps
the first circuit of most people in an emergency state far
too much of the time.
In 1968, a U.S. Public Health survey showed that 85% of
the population had one or more symptoms that we would
call bad first-circuit imprinting or conditioning. These
symptoms included dizzy spells, heart palpitations, wet
palms and frequent nightmares.

This means that 85 out of the next 100 people you meet
should be regarded as, more or less, "the Walking
Wounded."
This is the first level of meaning in our brutal, cynical
proposition that most people are almost as mechanical as
sci-fi robots. A man or woman entering a new situation with
the anxiety chemicals1 of a frightened infant coursing
through the brain stem is not going to be able to observe,
judge or decide anything very accurately.
And this is why Gurdjieff said, in his own jargon, that
people are asleep and having nightmares.
"FAIRNESS? DECENCY? HOW CAN YOU EXPECT FAIRNESS
OR DECENCY ON A PLANET OF SLEEPING PEOPLE?"
— G.I. Gurdjieff
This was the viewpoint of the earliest Christians, later
condemned as heretics (Gnostics) by the Roman
bureaucrats. The
We especially refer to adrenaline and adrenalutin, which signal
the whole organism to prepare to fight or flee.

Gospel of Truth, first century, says bluntly that history is a
nightmare:
... as if (mankind) were sunk in sleep and found themselves
in disturbing dreams. Either (there is) a place to which they
are fleeing...or they are involved in striking blows, or they
are receiving blows themselves... sometimes it is as if
people were murdering them...or they themselves are
killing their neighbors...
To these first Christians, as to the Buddhists, awakening
literally meant coming out of this nightmare of terrifying
fantasies.
In our terminology, it means correcting the editing that
cause us to behave and perceive like very badly
(inappropriately) wired robots and suddenly seeing the
unedited world.
It must be emphasized that this circuit, being the oldest in
evolutionary development, is the most mechanical, and the
most rapid. One is not conscious of time at all on the biosurvival circuit. Observe the speed of your dog's reaction at
the first sound of an intruder: the threatening bark, and the
movement of the whole body to alert status, is automatic.
Then the dog starts taking in other cues, to determine how
this particular intruder should be treated.
As Robert Ardrey reports the remarks of primatologist Ray
Carpenter, to understand this part of your brain...
Imagine that you are a monkey and you're running along a
path past a rock and unexpectedly meet face to face
another animal. Now, before you know whether to attack it,
to flee it, or to ignore it, you must make a series of
decisions. Is it monkey or non-monkey? If non-monkey, is
it pro-monkey or anti-monkey? If monkey, is it male or
female? If female, is she interested? If male, is it adult or
juvenile? If adult, is it of my group or some other?... You
have about one fifth of a second to make all these
decisions, or you could be attacked.
The bio-survival program first attaches to the safe space
around the mother (oral imprint), and then with age moves
further and further out, exploring what is safe and what is
not.
Without hard-wired genetic programs (i.e., automatic
programs) this second stage would be impossible, and no
mammal would ever leave the teat. The hard-wired
programs act automatically (UNCONSCIOUSLY) because if
you had to stop and think out each situation, you would be
eaten by the first predator.
Of course, the imprint is made by chance — by the
circumstances at the moment of imprint vulnerability.
(Recall the gosling who imprinted the ping-pong ball.) Some
imprint bravery, inquisitiveness and the exploratory drive;
others
imprint
timidity,
infophobia
(fear
of
the
unpredictable) and withdrawal, of which the extreme case is
the sad imprint called autism or childhood schizophrenia.
All of which is robotic, until one learns how to reprogram
and reimprint one's own brain circuits. In most cases, such
metaprogramming skill is never acquired. It all goes by in a
flash, on mechanical auto-pilot, in zero time. "I just found
myself doing it," says the soldier as he is being courtmartialled for cowardice or decorated for bravery.

It's safe out here!

TIMID
RETREAT

CONFIDENT
ADVANCE

Oh, Mommy, take me home!
Of course, on top of the hard-wired imprinting of the
biosurvival circuit comes "softer" conditioning. This allows
the safe-space perimeter to be generalized outward from
the mother's body to the pack or tribe—the "extended
family."
Every social animal has, in addition to the Darwinian
"instinct" (genetic program) of self-preservation, a similar
"instinct" to protect the gene-pool. This is the basis of
altruism, and social animals could not survive without it.
Wild dogs (and wolves) bark to warn the rest of the pack
that an intruder is coming. Your domesticated dog identifies
you as a pack-leader; he barks to warn you that an intruder
is coming. (He also barks, of course, to warn the intruder
that he is ready to fight for his territory.)
As civilization has advanced, the pack-bond (the tribe, the
extended family) has been broken. This is the root of the
widely diagnosed "anomie" or "alienation" or "existential
anguish" about which so many social critics have written so
eloquently.
What has happened is that the conditioning of the biosurvival bond to the gene-pool has been replaced by a
conditioning of bio-survival drives to hook onto the peculiar
tickets which we call "money".
Concretely, a modern man or woman doesn't look for
biosurvival security in the gene-pool, the pack, the
extended family.
Bio-survival depends on getting the tickets. "You can't live
without money," as the Living Theatre troop used to cry out
in anguish. If the tickets are withdrawn, acute bio-survival
anxiety appears at once.
Imagine, as vividly as possible, what you would feel, and
what you would do, if all your sources to bio-survival tickets
(money) were cut off tomorrow. This is precisely what tribal
men and women feel if cut off from the tribe; it is why
exile, or even ostracism, were sufficient punishments to
enforce tribal conformity throughout most of human
history. As recently as Shakespeare's day the threat of exile
was an acute terror signal ("Banished!" cries Romeo, "the
damned use that word in Hell!")
In traditional society, belonging to the tribe was biosecurity; exile was terror, and real threat of death. In
modern society, having the tickets (money) is bio-security;
having the tickets withdrawn is terror.
Welfare-ism, socialism, totalitarianism, etc. represent
attempts, in varying degrees of rationality and hysteria, to
re-create the tribal bond by making the State stand-in for
the gene-pool.
Conservatives who claim that no form of Welfare is
tolerable to them are asking that people live with total biosurvival anxiety and anomie combined with terror. The
conservatives, of course, vaguely recognize this and ask for
"local charity" to replace State Welfare — i.e., they ask for
the gene-pool to be restored by magic, among people
(denizens of a typical city) who are not genetically related
at all.

On the other hand, the State is not a gene-pool or a tribe,
and cannot really play the bio-survival unit convincingly.
Everybody on Welfare becomes paranoid, because they are
continually worrying that they are going to get cut off
("exiled") for some minor infraction of the increasingly
incomprehensible
bureaucratic
rules.
And
in
real
totalitarianism, in which the bogus identification of the
State with the tribe is carried to the point of a new
mysticism, the paranoia becomes total.
Real bonding can only occur in face-to-face groups of
reasonable size. Hence, the perpetual attempt (however
implausible in industrial circumstances) to decentralize, to
go back to the tribal ethos, to replace the State with
syndicates (as in anarchism) or affinity-groups (Reich's
"Consciousness III"). Recall the hippie crash-pad of the
sixties, which lives on in many rural communes.
Back in the real world, the tickets called "money" are the
biosurvival bond for most people. Anti-Semitism is a
complex aberration, of many facets and causes, but in its
classic form (the "Jewish Bankers' Conspiracy") it simply
holds that a hostile gene-pool controls the tickets for biosecurity. Such paranoia is inevitable in a money economy;
junkies have similar myths about who controls the supply of
heroin. Thus, as anti-Semitism has declined in America, the
"Bankers' Conspiracy" lives on in a new form. Now the
villains are old New England WASP families, the "Yankee
Establishment." Some Leftists will even show you charts of
the genealogies of these WASP bankers, the way antiSemites used to show Rothschild genealogies.

THE ALPHA MALES EAT FIRST:
THE RUNTS OF THE LITTER GET WHATEVER IS LEFT
OVER
C.H. Douglas, the engineer and economist, once made up a
chart, which he showed to the MacMillan Commission in
1932 when they were discussing money and credit
regulation. The chart graphed the rise and fall of interest
rates from the defeat of Napoleon in 1812 to the date the
Commission met in 1932, and on the same scale, the rise
and fall of the suicide rate in that one twenty-year period.
The two curves were virtually identical. Every time the
interest rate went up, so did the suicide rate; when interest
went down, so did suicide. This can hardly be "coincidence."
When interest rises, a certain number of businessmen go
bankrupt, a certain number of workers are thrown out of
their jobs, and everybody's bio-survival anxiety generally
increases.
Marxists and other radicals are urgently aware of such
factors in "mental health" and hence scornful of all types of
academic psychology which ignore these bio-survival
issues. Unfortunately, the Marxist remedy—making
everybody dependent for bio-survival on the whims of a
State bureaucracy—is a cure worse than the disease.
Bio-survival anxiety will only permanently disappear when
world-wide wealth has reached a level, and a distribution,
where, without totalitarianism, everyone has enough
tickets.
The Hunger Project, the idea of the Guaranteed Annual
Income, Douglas' National Dividend plan, etc. represent
groping toward that goal. The ideal can only be achieved in
a technology of abundance.
Extreme cases—persons who take their heaviest imprint on
the first (oral) circuit—tend to be viscerotonic, because this
imprint determines lifelong endocrine and glandular
processes.

Thus, in extreme they are "baby-faced" in adult life, never
lose their "baby-fat," are plump and round and gentle, etc.
They are easily "hurt" (threatened: terrified) by disapproval
of any sort, because in the baby-circuit of the brain,
disapproval suggests extinction by loss of the food supply.
We all have this circuit and need to exercise it periodically.
Cuddling, sucking, hugging etc. and daily playing with (a)
one's own body (b) another's body and (c) the
environment, are perpetually necessary to neurosomaticendocrine health. Those who deny such primordial functions
because of rigid imprinting on the Third (rationalistic) or
Fourth (moralistic) circuit tend to become "dried up,"
"prune-faced," unattractive, "cold," and muscularly rigid.
The baby-functions of playing with one's own body,
another's body and the environment continue throughout
life in all animals. This "playfulness" is a marked
characteristic of all conspicuously healthy individuals of the
sort Maslow calls "selfactualizers."
If this initial imprint is negative—if the universe in general
and other humans in particular are imprinted as dangerous,
hostile and frightening—the Prover will go on throughout
life adjusting all perceptions to fit this map. This is what is
known as the "Injustice Collector" syndrome (in the
language of Dr. Edmund Bergler). The female members of
this imprint group become Radical Feminists; the male
members are less organized and can be found in fringe
groups of the extreme Left and extreme Right.
Such a pattern is unconscious in three ways. It is
unconscious because automatic: it happens without
thought, as a robot program.
It is also unconscious because it began before the infant
had language and hence it is pre-verbal, inarticulate, felt
rather than considered. And it is unconscious because it is
all-over-thebody- at-once. Specifically, it is characterized by
the Respiratory Block first noted by Wilhelm Reich: a
chronic muscular armoring that prevents proper, relaxed
breathing. Popular speech recognizes this state as "being
up-tight."
All of the most successful reimprinting techniques
(therapies) for this kind of chronic anxiety work on the body
first, not on the "mind." The Reichians, Rolfers, Primal
Scream therapists, Orr's "rebirthers," Gesaltists, etc. all
know, whatever specialized jargons they may use, that a
bad bio-survival imprint can only be corrected by working
on the biological being itself, the body that feels perpetually
vulnerable and under attack. Even Neurolinguistic
Programming (NLP) begins by inducing the patient to relax
and breathe easily.
As Gregory Bateson has pointed out. Konrad Lorenz
acquired his marvelous insights into the imprinting
process—for which he won the Nobel prize—by consciously
imitating the body movements of the animals he was
studying. Watching Lorenz lecture, one could "see" each
animal he discussed, because Lorenz would dramatize or
"become" that animal, in the manner of a Method Actor.
Even earlier, Wilhelm Reich discovered that he could
understand his patients with remarkable clarity by imitating
their characteristic body movements and postures. The biosurvival imprints, especially traumatic ones, are all-overthe-body, frozen (in Reich's metaphor) in chronic muscle
and gland mechanisms.
If you can't understand somebody's "irrational" behavior,
start by observing their breathing. You will very quickly get
an idea of what is bothering them. This is why all schools of
yoga— Buddhist, Hindu or Sufi—place such emphasis on
restoring natural breathing before trying to move the
student on to higher circuits and wider consciousness.
This is of more than "psychological" import. Every study of
the psychosomatic aspects of cancer and asthma, for
instance, finds this pattern of chronic muscular contraction
(subjectively felt as anxiety) among the predisposing
factors. What the Thinker thinks, the Prover proves. People
are strangling their inner organs every day because they
are afraid.
Mary Baker Eddy may have been exaggerating slightly
when she said, "All illness is manifested fear;" but holistic
medicine more and more recognizes that if that damned
word "all" is replaced by a more tentative "most," Mrs. Eddy
was close to the facts.

Even old-fangled M.D.s who won't consider holistic ideas for
a minute, admit that some persons are mysteriously "more
susceptible" to disease than other persons. What is this
metaphysical
"susceptibility"?
Anthropologist
Ashley
Montagu has collected numerous statistics on children who
were deprived of maternal love at the crucial point of
imprint vulnerability in infancy. They not only died younger
than the national average, but were sicklier all their lives
and even grew up to be several inches shorter than the
average adult height for their sex.
What makes for "susceptibility" (aside from possible genetic
factors) can only be such an anxiety imprint (muscle
tension) on the first circuit.
Christian Science—or any other religion that dogmatically
insists that "God" wants us to be happy and successful—can
cure such conditions "miraculously." What the Thinker
thinks the Prover proves. Absolute faith that "God" is
supporting you, beamed out from the brain all day long,
day after day, signals the muscles to relax, and natural
buoyancy and health returns.
Throughout human life, when the bio-survival circuit senses
danger, all other mental activity ceases. All other circuits
shut down until the bio-survival problem is "solved,"
realistically or symbolically. This is of crucial importance in
mind-washing and brain-programming.
To create a new imprint, first reduce the subject to the
state of infancy, i.e., bio-survival vulnerability. We will
enlarge upon this later. In pre-neurological terms, the biosurvival circuit is what we usually call "consciousness," per
se. It is the sense of being herenow, in this vulnerable
body, subject to the raw energies and forces of the physical
universe. When we are "unconscious," the bio-survival
circuit is turned off and doctors may cut us up without our
attempting to flee or even crying out.
EXERCISES
1. Determine to enjoy this primitive circuit fully from now
on.
Play with yourself and others and the environment
shamelessly, like a newborn baby. Meditate on "Unless ye
become as a little child, ye shall in no wise enter the
Kingdom of Heaven."
2. Never mind your diet—you will reach the optimum
weight for your height when your brain is operating
properly. Enjoy one really sweet and gooey desert every
week. Diabetics, of course, should buy this goody in the
non-sugar section.
3. Get "high" (on marijuana if this is permissible to your
superego, or on ginseng, which is legal everywhere and
recommended by many holistic physicians) and then go to a
health spa.
Enjoy a good swim, a massage and a sauna. Repeat every
week, forever.
4. Take a course on kung fu or karate for at least three
months, then re-read this whole chapter. You will be
surprised at how much more every sentence will mean.
5. Lie on your back and pant rapidly to the count of 20.
(Each exhale-inhale cycle counts as one, not as two.)
Panting means breathing rapidly through your mouth, as
forbidden by almost all experts on health, but this is only an
exercise, not a full-time practice. When you reach 20, stop
and resume nose-breathing, in the slow, rhythmic manner
recommended by yogis, to the count of 20. Then repeat the
panting to the count of 20. Then repeat proper yoga
breathing.
This is known as the "breath of fire" in Tantric yoga. The
results are most amusing and enlightening. Try it!'
6. Visit an aquarium and observe very closely. Try to see
the bio-survival circuit of the fish brain in operation and
recognize when and how that circuit in your own brain has
operated throughout your life.
7. If you don't have a baby, or haven't had one for many
years, play with somebody else's baby for an hour. Then
reread this chapter.

Like opiate use, this exercise seems to trigger neurotransmitters similar to mother's milk; i.e., it takes you back to
the snug security of breast-feeding. And it is not addictive.

CHAPTER FOUR
THE ANAL EMOTIONAL TERRITORIAL CIRCUIT
Run, puppy, run!
Run, puppy, run!
Yonder comes the big dog —
Run, puppy, run!
— Children's rhyme

The second circuit, the emotional-territorial networks of the
brain, is concerned entirely with power politics. This
"patriotic" circuit is built into all vertebrates and is perhaps
500 million to 1000 million years old. In the modern human
it seems to be centralized in the thalamus—the "back brain"
or "old brain" and is linked with the voluntary nervous
system and the muscles.
This circuit appears in each newborn when the DNA master
tape sends out RNA messenger molecules to trigger the
mutation from neonate to "toddler," which involves first of
all standing erect. Walking, mastering gravity, overcoming
physical obstacles and learning to manipulate others
politically are the vulnerable points at which imprinting and
heavy conditioning occur. The muscles that perform these
power functions are quickly programmed with what become
chronic, life-long reflexes.
Depending as always the accidents of the environment—
what happens at points of neurological vulnerability—this
circuit will organize itself into a strong, dominating role in
the pack (or family) or a weak, submissive role. Without
going into the jungles with the ethologists, one can observe
this mammalian imprinting process in any litter of puppies.
It is very quickly determined who is TOP DOG and who is
BOTTOM DOG.
Status in the pack or tribe is assigned on the basis of
preverbal signaling system (kinesics) in which these muscle
reflexes are crucial. All of the emotional games or cons
listed in the popular psychological game-manuals of Dr. Eric
Berne and the Transactional Analysts are second-circuit
imprints, or standard mammalian politics.
To quote from my novel Schrodinger's Cat:
Most of the domesticated primates of Terra did not know
they were primates. They thought they were something
apart from and "superior" to the rest of the planet.
Even Benny Benedict's "One Month to Go" column was
based on that illusion. Benny had actually read Darwin
once, in college a long time ago, and had heard of sciences
like ethology and ecology, but the facts of evolution had
never really registered on him. He never thought of himself
as a primate. He never realized his friends and associates

were primates. Above all, he never understood that the
alpha males of Unistat were typical leaders of primate
bands. As a result of this inability to see the obvious, Benny
was constantly alarmed and terrified by the behavior of
himself, his friends and associates and especially the alpha
males of the pack. Since he didn't know it was ordinary
primate behavior, it seemed just awful to him.
Since a great deal of primate behavior was considered just
awful, most of the domesticated primates spent most of
their time trying to conceal what they were doing.
Some of the primates got caught by other primates. All of
the primates lived in dread of getting caught.
Those who got caught were called no-good shits.
The term no-good shit was a deep expression of primate
psychology. For or instance, one wild primate (a
chimpanzee) taught sign language by two domesticated
primates (scientists) spontaneously put together the signs
for "shit" and "scientist" to describe a scientist she didn't
like. She was calling him shitscientist.
She also put together the signs for "shit" and "chimpanzee"
for another chimpanzee she didn't like. She was calling him
shit-chimpanzee.
"You no-good shit," domesticate primates often said to each
other.
This metaphor was deep in primate psychology because
primates mark their territories with excretions, and
sometimes they threw excretions at each other when
disputing over territories.
One primate wrote a long book describing in vivid detail
how his political enemies should be punished. He imagined
them in an enormous hole in the ground, with flames and
smoke and rivers of shit. This primate was named Dante
Alighieri.
Another primate wrote that every primate infant goes
through a stage of being chiefly concerned with biosurvival, i.e., food, i.e., Mommie's Titty. He called this the
Oral Stage.
He said the infant next went on to a stage of learning
mammalian politics, i.e., recognizing the Father (alphamale) and his Authority and territorial demands. He called
this, with an insight that few primates shared, the Anal
Stage.
This primate was named Freud. He had taken his own
nervous system apart and examined its component circuits
by periodically altering its structure with neurochemicals.
Among the anal insults exchanged by domesticated
primates when fighting for their space were: "Up your ass,"
"Go shit in your hat," "You're full of shit," and many others.
One of the most admired alpha-males in the Kingdom of the
Franks was General Canbronne. General Canbronne won
this adulation for the answer he gave when asked to
surrender at Waterloo.
"Merde," was the answer General Canbronne gave.
The word petard means a kind of bomb. It comes from the
same Olde English root as fart.
General Canbronne's mentality was typical of the
alphamales of the military caste.
When primates went to war or got violent in other ways,
they always said they were about to knock the shit out of
the enemy.
They also spoke of dumping on each other.

The standard "authority" reflex on the emotional-territorial
circuit is to swell the muscles and howl. You will find this
among birds as well as mammals, and in the Board meeting
of your local bank. The standard "submission" reflex is to

shrink the muscles, lower the head, and "crawl away." You
will find this among dogs, primates, fowl and employees
who wish to keep their jobs everywhere.
If the first (bio-survival) circuit is chiefly imprinted by the
mother, the second (emotional-territorial) circuit is chiefly
imprinted by the father—the nearest alpha male. It has
been proposed, by sociologist G. Rattray Taylor that
societies swing back and forth between "Matrist" periods, in
which motherly oral values predominate, and "Patrist"
periods, in which fatherly anal values are in ascendance.

THE STANDARD AUTHORITY REFLEX
Taylor's table of the characteristics of these "Matrist" and
"Patrist" periods is as follows:
Matrist
Patrist
Permissive toward sex
Restrictive toward sex
Freedom for women
Limitation of freedom for women
Women have high status
Women have low status
Chastity not valued
Chastity highly valued
Egalitarian
Authoritarian
Progressive
Conservative
No distrust of research
Distrust of research
Spontaneous
Inhibitions
Sex differences minimized
Sex differences maximized
Fear of incest
Fear of homosexuality
Hedonic
Ascetic
Mother Goddess
Father God
Whether or not societies wobble between these extremes as
Taylor claims, individuals certainly do. These are merely the
consequences of (a) having the heaviest imprint on the oral
(Matrist) bio-survival circuit or (b) having the heaviest
imprint on the anal (Patrist) territorial circuit.
In pre-ethological terms, the emotional-territorial circuit is
what we usually call "ego." Ego is simply the mammalian
recognition of one's status in the pack; it is a "role" as
sociologists say, a single brain circuit which mistakes itself
for the whole Self, the entire brain-mind apparatus. The
"egotist" behaves like "a two year old," in the common
saying, because Ego is the imprint of the toddling and
toilet-training stage.
The question of how human an animal is (especially a pet
dog or cat) never ceases to divide scientists from
laypersons—and one scientist from another. In terms of the
present theory, the differences between domesticated
primates (humans) and other domesticated animals are
virtually nil, as long as we are talking only about the first
two circuits. (Since most people spend most of their time
on these primitive circuits, the differences are often much
less obvious than the similarities.) Real differences begin to
appear when the third, semantic circuit enters the picture.

MOST MAMMALS MARK THEIR TERRITORIES WITH
EXCRETIONS.
DOMESTICATED
PRIMATES
MARK
THEIR TERRITORIES WITH INK EXCRETIONS ON
PAPER.
For instance, novice dog-trainers always make the mistake
of using too many words. Because the dog is so "human" in
so many ways (canines, like primates, are great mimics),
the novice imputes too much "humanity" to them. The
average dog has a vocabulary of around 150 words, and
within that semantic universe is quite bright. It is very easy
to teach a dog the meaning of "Sit," "Stay," "Attack," etc.;
and the dog will learn the meaning of "walk" and "food"
even without your trying to teach him. The problem begins
when the novice expects the dog to understand something
like "No, no, Fritz—anywhere else in the bedroom, but not
on the bed." Even a non-English-speaking human would not
grasp that, except vaguely. The dog gives up on such
sentences and guesses what he can from your mammalian
(and unconscious) body-language.
Understanding these distinctions can vastly improve
primate canine communication. For instance, my wife, a
sociologist, trained our dog, Fang, not to beg at the table in
the most direct mammalian language possible. She simply
growled at him the first few times he approached her while
she was eating. (She had been reading ethology, of
course.) Fang understood fully; he soon learned to avoid
the table while the Pack-Leaders (my wife and myself) were
eating. His genetic programs told him we were the Big
Dogs, or as close to the Big Dogs as he could find in that
environment; dogs, like wolves, have a genetic program
about not annoying the Big Dogs while they're eating. The
growl told him all he needed to know about the local
parameters of that rule. Fang, incidentally, was a
Dachshund-Labrador mix, and strange-looking to most
humans. People would stop me on the street while I was
walking him and ask, "What...IS.. .that???"
Persons (extreme cases) who take the heaviest imprint on
this territorial-emotional circuit tend to be musculotonic.
That is, they hold most of their attention and energy, in the
muscular attack-defense systems and grow up medium
weight—heavy enough to be hard to knock down, light
enough to be quick and sinewy. Often, they become bodybuilders, weight-lifters etc. and have an extraordinary
absorption in demonstrating their strength. (Even shaking
hands with them, you get the message that they are not
exchanging amity but demonstrating power.) Most societies
shunt these types into the military where their propensities
are put to proper ethological use, defending the tribal turf.
The anal orientation of this circuit explains the oddity of
military speech first noted by Norman Mailer: "ass" means
one's whole self and "shit" means all surrounding
circumstance.

Viscerotonic
Musculotonic
Extreme
Extreme
Circuit I Type
Circuit II Type
Oral Imprint
Anal Imprint
IMPRINTING AFFECTS THE WHOLE NERVOUS SYSTEM.
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AFFECTS THE WHOLE BODY.

“I GIVE ORDERS HERE!”

“IT’S SAFE OUT HERE”

The grid of Circuits I and II creates four quadrants.
Note that Hostile Strength (the tyrant) is inclined to
paranoid withdrawal; he must govern, but he is also
afraid. Cf. the careers of Hitler, Stalin, Howard
Hughes, etc. and the inaccessible Castle and Court in
Kafka's allegories. Note also that the dependent
neurotic is not in retreat at all; he or she advances
upon you, demanding fulfillment of emotional
"needs" (imprints).
These four quadrants have been known since the dawn of
selfconsciousness.
For instance, in the terminology of the medieval psychology
of "humours," these four imprint-types are known as:

Dominance
(Top of the pecking order)

Retreat

Advance

Submission
(Bottom of the pecking order)

Bilius Humor
(Hostile Strenght)

Sanguinary Humor
(Friendly Strenght)

Choleric Humor
(Hostile Weakness)

Phlegmatic Humor
(Friendly Weakness)

Clockwise, the Sanguinary type (friendly strength) was
identified with the Lion archetype and the element, fire. The
Lion, because of the dignity of these big cats, represents
"good" strength, and the fire represents power. The
Phlegmatic type (friendly weakness) was identified with the
Angel archetype and the element water: these people are
"too sensitive to fight" and "go with the flow." The Choleric
types were identified with the Bull archetype (truculent
suspicion, paranoia) and the element, earth, standing for
sluggish pseudo "stupidity." (This is the traditional stance of
defeated races dealing with their conquerors.)
The Bilius types (hostile strength) were identified with the
Eagle archetype (symbol of Imperial Rome, the German
royal family, etc.) and the element air, air probably means
sky, because these types seem "high and mighty."
These symbols go back a long way; Cabalists find them in
the Old Testament (where, indeed, the lion-angel-bull-eagle
appear in Ezekiel). They are found constantly in Catholic
art, associated with the four evangelists (Matthew-angel,
Mark-lion, Luke-bull, John-eagle)1 and run all through the
design of Tarot card decks, medieval and modern.
1 These are the Four Old Men in Finnegans Wake. Matt Gregory,
because his last name contains ego equals the angel; Marcus
Lyons equals the lion; Luke Tarpey equals taur, the bull; Johnny
McDougal equals ougal the eagle.

“Mommy take me home” “Please tell me what to do”
The second, emotional-territorial circuit, creates a
two-dimensional social space in conjunction with
first-circuit advance-retreat.

In the clever language of the fashionable Transactional
Analysis system, these four imprint types are categorized
as the four basic life scripts, to wit:

Bilius/Hostile
Strenght
“I’m ok; You’re not ok”
Choleric/Hostile
Weakness
“I’m not ok; You’re not ok”

Sanguinary/Friendly
Strenght
“I’m ok; You’re ok”
Phlegmatic/Friendly
Weakness
“I’m, not ok; You’re ok”

It is the Phlegmatic (friendly weakness; dependent
neurotic)
type
who
generally
turn
up
in
the
psychotherapist's office seeking reimprinting voluntarily.
They are not-okay, but they have great faith that the
therapist is okay.
The Bilius (hostile strength) and Choleric (hostile weakness)
arrive in therapy, if at all, only because their associates or
families, or more commonly, a law court, has ordered them
to try to reimprint their compulsive hostilities.
The Sanguinary (friendly strength) type virtually never
comes for psychotherapy. He or she is satisfied with his or
her life, and so is the rest of society. Alas, they nonetheless
can get to the position where they need therapy of some
sort, simply because they may take on too much
responsibility and carry too many burdens. They will
generally arrive at the therapists only if sent there by an
M.D. who has intuited where their ulcers came from.
This system is not meant to be rigid or to imply that there
are only four types of humanoid robots. The later circuits,
still to be discussed, modify all this considerably: some
imprints are wobbly (cover two or more quadrants partly);
and we are all capable of sudden brain change. It is also
important to realize that the four archetypes are for
convenience only—and they are convenient, as witness
their reappearance in Transactional Analysis, where their
historical connection with Lion-Angel-Bull-Eagle isn't even
recognized. But each quadrant can be subdivided much
more sharply, if necessary for diagnostic purposes.
For instance, the most widely used psychological test in this
country the Leary Interpersonal Grid (1957) divides the
four quadrants into sixteen sub-quadrants and allows one
to grade each in terms of moderate-to-excessive tendency
to behave that way. In the grid on which the Leary
categories are drawn, the moderate imprints are in toward
the center and the excessive or extreme cases are out
toward the perimeter, but what is being measured is still
basically the way the first two circuits (oral-biosurvival and
anal-territorial) are imprinted.
To clarify this a bit further, imagine that four babies were
all born at the same instant in John J. Boscowitz Memorial
Hospital, Enny Town, planet Earth. We come back twenty
years later and we find that each of them has a separate
personality and life-style (a problem for the astrologers, but
let that pass). To make things easier for us, they have
actually landed in our four quadrants.
Subject #1 is Responsible/Over-Conventional (Sanguinary).
Everybody agrees that SHe (she or he) is usually a beloved
community leader—helpful, considerate, friendly and solidly
successful. Some may even say SHe spoils people with
kindness, forgives anything, agrees with everybody and
actually enjoys governing those who cannot govern
themselves. The noble Lion.
This person may be (and probably is) a total robot. That is,
if SHe can never give orders in a strict way, is never able to
doubt others, is never ego-centered, etc. then SHe has
mechanically imprinted the First Quadrant, "friendly
strength." On the other hand, if SHe is able to move out of
the First Quadrant in appropriate situations (exercizing
hostility against the marauder or predator, admitting
weakness when overwhelmed), SHe has an imprintedconditioned predilection for "I'm okay, you're okay," but is
not totally robotized by it.

LEARY'S INTERPERSONAL GRID

THE FOUR QUADRANTS HAVE BEEN RECOGNIZED IN MANY
AGES AND EXPRESSED IN MANY SYMBOLS.

Subject #2 has, after the same twenty years of imprinting
and conditioning, landed in Quadrant 2 friendly weakness
(Phlegmatic).
SHe is self-critical, shy, timid, easily led, "spineless," and
always looking for somebody to Take Charge and Give
Orders.
The unearthly Angel, or in modem symbolism, the Flower
Child.
Again, this imprinting-conditioning may be totally robotic,
or there may be enough flexibility for the person to jump to
another quadrant when necessary.
Subject #3 had landed, with total robothood or with some
small flexibility, in Quadrant 3, "Hostile Weakness"
(Choleric).
She distrusts everybody, rebels against everything, speaks
constantly in sarcasms, complains chronically and is
generally bitter, resentful and (to some extent) paranoid.
The sullen Bull.
Subject #4 has landed in Quadrant 4, "Hostile Strength"
(Bilius), and is regarded as "bossy," cold, unfeeling,
dictatorial, self-important, boastful etc. but still in the
judgment of most, "a good leader." The imperial Eagle.
The irony and the tragedy of human life is that none of
these subjects are aware at all of their robotry. Each will
explain to you, at great length and with great conviction,
why each of these robotic, endlessly-repeated reflexes are
caused by the situations around them, i.e., by the "bad"
behavior of other people.
WHAT THE THINKER THINKS, THE PROVER PROVES.
Thus, if you put these four primates on a desert island, you
can predict, with virtually as much certainty as a chemist
telling us what will happen if four elements are
compounded, that Subject #1 and #4 (Friendly Strength
and Hostile Strength) will both try to take over—#1 to help
the others, #4 because SHe can't imagine anybody else in
control. #1 will submit to #4 because #1 wants things to

run smoothly for the good of all, and they never will run
smoothly if #4 is not TOP DOG. #2, Friendly Weakness, will
not care whether #1 or #4 rules, just so long as somebody
else is making the decisions. And #3 will complain (and
complain, and complain), no matter who is in charge, while
skillfully avoiding any action that would require taking
personal responsibility.
The same political decisions would be made by four
chimpanzees or four dogs, if they have the four imprint
quadrants equally divided as in our hypothetical example.
Sociobiologists, who are very aware of these four quadrants
in both human and animal societies, claim that each
organism is born with a genetic predisposition to play one
of these roles.
Critics of sociobiology, who are dogmatic Liberals, denounce
this idea as monstrous. We will not attempt to decide that
difficult question here, since any attempt to decide what
aspects of behavior are genetic and what are learned after
birth always descends into ideological metaphysics in the
prevailing absence of real data. We say merely that,
whether or not you or I were born with a predisposition for
one quadrant, all organisms are born with a predisposition
for imprint vulnerability, and the imprint, once set in the
neural circuitry, acts as robotically as any genetic hardwiring.
How imprints can be changed will be discussed as we
proceed. The exercises in each chapter are intended to
make imprints a little less rigid, a little more flexible.
The top two quadrants of the Leary grid—Friendly Strength
and Hostile Strength—correspond roughly to what Nietzsche
called Herrenmoral, the ethics of ruling classes. Indeed,
Hostile Strength is the embodiment of Nietzsche's "Blond
Beast," the primitive conqueror-pirate type we find at the
dawn of every civilization. This is what Nietzsche also called
the "animal" or "unsublimated" form of the Will to Power.
(Friendly Strength on the other hand does not correspond,
except very slightly, to Nietzsche's "sublimated Will to
Power." To find that we will have to wait until we come to
the Fifth [Neurosomatic] Circuit—the stage of Conscious
Evolution.)
The bottom two quadrants—Friendly Weakness and Hostile
Weakness—correspond to Nietzsche's Sklavmoral, the
ethics of slaves, serfs and "lower"-caste or "lower"-class
persons everywhere. Nietzsche's concept of "resentment"—
the hidden revenge motive within "altruistic" philosophies—
claims there is an element of hostility within even the
Friendly Weakness side of the grid; i.e., in conventional
"Christian ethics," as typified by the image of "gentle Jesus,
meek and mild." This paradox—the Friendly Weakling is a
Hostile Weakling in disguise, the Flower Child a potential
Mansonized robot-killer—reappears in modern clinical
parlance as the concept of "passive aggressive."
Occultists in their strange jargon describe these types as
"psychic vampires."
This is why Nietzsche claimed that St. Paul had destroyed
the evangel (good news) of Jesus and replaced it with a
dysangel (bad news). The evangel of Jesus, as Nietzsche
saw it, was the sublimated Will to Power, the path of
conscious evolution to Superhumanity. The dysangel, the
bad news, created by St. Paul was traditional Sklavmoral—
"Slaves, obey your masters," but nourish your resentment
with the firm belief that you are "good," and they are "evil,"
and you will eventually have the pleasure of watching them
burn in hell forever. In Nietzsche's analysis, all Marx added
to this was the idea of burning and punishing the Master
Class here and now instead of waiting for "God" to attend to
the matter post mortem.
The same analysis appears in e.e. cummings' unforgettable
couplet on the Communist intelligentsia of the 1930s:
every kumrad is a little bit of concentrated hate
It is interesting, in this connection, that Nietzsche dropped
"psychological" language from his books as he went along
and replaced it with "physiological" language. For instance,
in his later works, such as The Anti-Christ, the "resentment"
within
slave-morality
(conventional
Christianity)
is
diagnosed as a physiological reaction characteristic of
certain physical types.
Nietzsche was on the right track, but lacking neurology he
looked for the physical basis of these processes in genetics
alone.

Imprinting theory suggests, on the contrary, that such
physiological Bottom Dog reflexes are created by specific
triggers at early moments of imprint vulnerability.
But they are nonetheless all-over-the-body-at-once and
hence physiological. Any Method Actor knows this and his
body will swell physically if he is playing a strong character
and shrink if he is playing a weakling. Rod Steiger, in
particular, actually seems taller or shorter depending on
whether he is playing a Top Dog or a Bottom Dog.
Remember again that all these categories are for
convenience and that nature has not employed the sharp
boundaries that we use in our models of nature. Thus, with
Leary's 1957 schemata, we can further sub-divide our 4
types into 16 types with 4 degrees of each, for a total of 64
sub-types.
In the next section, to simplify what may be growing too
complex, we will reduce everything again just to the
interactions of the first two circuits.
Any system for describing human behavior should be
flexible enough to be extended indefinitely, and should also
still contain meaning when reduced back to its
fundamentals.
Since we all contain a territorial-emotional circuit we need
to exercise it daily.
Playing with children is one good exercise—especially if you
play with large groups, in which case you will have to
referee mammalian territorial disputes. Swimming, jogging
or whatever else appeals to you is good, to keep the
muscles from feeling you are trying to starve them. Trying
to "psych out" somebody else's emotional state is one of
the best exercises for this circuit, and is very educational in
general. It activates the old mammal centers in the
thalamus where body-language communicates emotional
signals.
A good General uses this circuit to "psych out" what the
enemy General is planning. A good mother uses it, vice
versa, to figure out what baby's howl means in each
particular case.
Advanced work with this circuit, involving some hazards in
personal relations, would involve such games as learning to
bully somebody if you've never been able to do that before,
learning to submit docilely if you've never been able to do
that before, and learning to express anger appropriately
and letting go of it when it is no longer necessary.
It will be observed by the thoughtful or visually-oriented
readers that each "extreme" type can be expressed on the
Leary Grid as a very off-center pie-slice:

Obviously, an ideally "balanced" person—that is, one not
robotized and able to adjust to circumstances as they
arise— would not be so off-centered. Such a person would
be able to move a little bit into each quadrant "according to
the times and seasons" as the Chinese say, but would
basically maintain a centered detachment between all of
them. She or he could be graphed as a circle:

The dark inner circle would represent the adamantine
individuality of this ideally detached person—detached from
robot imprints. The grey circle would represent the ability to

move out into each quadrant in times when that was
necessary.
Circles of this sort, called mandalas, are widely used for
meditation in the Buddhist tradition. Often they are
cornered by four demons who evidently, like the Occidental
lion, bull, angel and eagle, represent the extremes to be
avoided.

.. .being humus, the same returns.
— James Joyce, Finnegans Wake
EXERCISES
1. Whenever you meet a young male or female, ask
yourself consciously, "If it came to hand-to-hand combat,
could I beat him/her' ?" Then try to determine how much of
your behavior is based on unconsciously asking and
answering that question via pre-verbal "body language."
2. Get roaring drunk and pound the table, telling everybody
in a loud voice just what dumb assholes they all are.1
3. Get a book on meditation, practice for two fifteen-minute
sessions every day for a month, and then go see somebody
who always manages to upset you or make you defensive.
See if they can still press your territorial retreat buttons.2
4. Spend a week-end at an Encounter Group. During the
first half-day, try to intuit which quadrant each participant
is coming
1 Opiates and small does of alcohol seem to trigger neurotransmitters characteristic of Circuit I breast-fed tranquillity.
Large doses of alcohol often reverse this and trigger neurotransmitters characteristic of territorial struggle. Note the anal
vocabulary of hostile drunks as their alcoholic intake increases.
2 A good book on Meditation is Undoing Yourself With Energized
Meditation & Other Devices, by Christopher S. Hyatt, Ph.D.,
(New Falcon Publications).

from. At the end, see if any of them have become less
robotized.
See if you have become less robotized.
5. Go to the Lion House at the zoo. Study the lions until you
feel you really understand their tunnel-reality.
6. Rent a video of the kind of comedy that small children
like—the Three Stooges, Abbott & Costello, etc. Observe
carefully, and think about what function this humor serves;
but don't neglect to laugh at it yourself.
7. Spend all day Sunday looking at animal shows on TV
(getting stoned on weed, if this is permissible to you). Then
go into the office the next day and observe the primate
pack hierarchy carefully, like a scientist.

CHAPTER FIVE
DICKENS & JOYCE: THE TWO-CIRCUIT DIALECTIC
That why all parks up excited about his gunnfodder. That
why ecrazyaztecs and crime ministers preaching him
mornings.
— James Joyce, Finnegans Wake

THE GRACIOUS GODDESS AND THE TERRIFYING
GIANT HAUNT OUR LEGENDS AND OUR LITERATURE.

Hearasay in paradox lust.—
James Joyce, Finnegans Wake
The shock and dismay of the infant when the harshness of
traditional toilet training introduces the anal-Patrist secondcircuit values into the previously blissful oral-Matrist
continuum is conveyed with great artistry in Dickens' David
Copperfield. So overt is this sequence, indeed, that it is
hard to believe it was actually written half a century before
Freud's clinical writings.
Dickens describes an idyllic infanthood in which David lives
with a widowed mother who can safely be characterized as
a human embodiment of the bona dea (good goddess) of
the ancients (who lingers still as the "fairy godmother" in
children's tales). Onto this happy scene intrudes the
horrible step-father Mr. Murdstone whose "Jehovah
complex" makes him an avatar of the punishing father-god.
There is no way of obeying all of Murdstone's rules; there
are too many of them, and they are mostly unstated and
implicit anyway. David undergoes some monumental
lashings on the buttocks (for his own good, of course,
although Dickens emphasizes in a quite Freudian way the
obvious enjoyment Murdstone obtains from these sessions).
Quite naturally, David begins to internalize this anal system
of values and imagines he is quite a guilty little wretch and
richly deserves this torture. Then Dickens inserts the
following scene, when David returns from a year at school:
I went in with quiet, timid step. God knows how infantile
the memory may have been that was awakened in me at
the sound of my mother's voice in the old parlour when I
set foot in the hall. I think I must have laid in her arms and
heard her singing to me when I was but a baby. The strain
was new to me but it was so old that it filled my heart
brimful like a friend come back from a long absence.
I believed from the solitary and thoughtful way in which my
mother murmured her song that she was alone, and I went
softly into the room. She was sitting by the fire, suckling an
infant whose tiny hand she held against her neck. Her eyes
were looking down upon its face and she sat singing to it. I
was so far right that she had no other companion. I spoke
to her and she started and cried out. But seeing me she
called me her dear Davy, her own boy: and coming half
way across the room to meet me, kneeled down upon the
ground and kissed me, and laid my head down on her
bosom near the little creature that was nestling there, and
put its hand up to my lips.
I wish I had died. I wish I had died then, with that feeling in
my heart. I should have been more fit for heaven than I
have ever been since.
The dream of return to oral bio-security is too overt to
require commentary.

Similarly, in Joyce's monumental novel of the mind of a
man asleep, Finnegans Wake, the Father and the FatherGod are always associated with war and excretion, as Joyce
scholar William York Tindall has noted. As "Gunn, the
Farther," the terrifying anal monster combines pistol, deity
and flatulence; as "Delude of Israel," he is the jealous
(territorial) Old Testament "Lord of Hosts," i.e., of battles.
His insignia, the hundred letter thunder-word which recurs
ten times in the dream, always combines Fatherhood,
menace, defecation and war: for instance, in its first
appearance on page 1, it is:
bababalalgharaghtakamminaronnkonnbronnton
nerronntounnthunntrovarrhounawnskawn
toohoohoondenthurnuk
Here we find Baba (Arabic, father), phonetic Abba (Hebrew,
father), phonetic Canbronne (the general who so
appropriately said merde when asked to surrender the
territory), phonetic Gaelic scan (crack: of thunder or of the
anus), ronnen (Germanic, excretion), the suggestive orden
implying both Germanic medal for valor and English ordure,
etc. The terrifying Father- God elsewhere "Makes his
manuvres in open ordure" and preaches all the analauthoritarian values: "No cods before me... Thou shall not
commix idolatry... Love my label like myself."
He is the villain of the "goddinpotty" (garden party)—the
trickster- god who set the baited trap in the Garden of
Eden; the ego internalized in toilet-training (potty); the god
of thunder and wrath (god-din).
Fleeing him, the "unhappitants of earth" always seek his
opposite, ALP (German, dream; also the root of the first
letters of the Greek and Hebrew alphabets—alpha and
aleph, the source, the beginning)—Anna Livia Plurabella,
when her name is written in full: the waters of life
combined with all beautiful women. She is as oral and
loving as "the Omniboss" is anal and threatening:
...with a beak, with a spring, all her rillringlets shaking,
rock drops in her tachie, tramtokens in her hair, all waived
to a point and then all inuendation, little oldfashioned
mummy, little wonderful mommy, ducking under
bridges...as happy as the day is wet, babbling, bubbling,
chattering to herself, deloothering the fields...
This amniotic river-woman is the perfect mother of infantile
dream memory and the Great Goddess of the ancients, the
ideal bio-survival safe, warm place and to her Joyce offers
his most fervent prayer:
In the name of Annah the Allmaziful, the Everliving, the
Bringer of Plurabilites, haloed be her eve, her singtime
sung, her rill be run, unhemmed as it is uneven!
Humanity, in Joyce's view as in Rattray Taylor's, is forever
leaving her to follow the Hero (Father) to "the bluddlefilth of
Waterloo" (battlefield of Waterloo with blood and excrement
superimposed to reveal the anal-territorial roots of war)
and then returning, temporarily chastened, "to list, as she
bibs us, by the waters of babalong."
In Chapter Three of Finnegans Wake, the "offenders"
(invaders) and "defenders" (natives) get so thoroughly
mixed up that all that remains is a composite "fender" who
takes the blame for everybody.
This cyclical view of history, whether in Joyce, Rattray
Taylor, Vico (Joyce's source), Hegel-and-Marx, etc. is only
part of the truth, but it needs to be stressed because it is
the part that most people fearfully refuse to recognize.
Whether we speak in terms of Taylor's Matrist-Patrist
dialectic, Vice's cycle of Divine, Heroic and Urbanized ages,
the Marx-Hegel trinity of Thesis-Antithesis-Synthesis, or
any variation thereon, we are speaking of a pattern that is
real and that does repeat.
But it only does so to the extent that people are robotized:
trapped in hard-wired reflexes.
When the accumulated facts, gimmicks, tools, techniques
and gadgets of neuro-science—the science of brain change
and brain liberation—reaches a certain critical mass, we will
all be able to free ourselves from these robot cycles. It is
the thesis of this book that we have been approaching that
critical mass for several decades now and will reach the
crossover point faster than you expect.
The current rampages of territorial-emotional pugnacity
sweeping this planet are not just another civilization falling,
Vico fashion.

They are the birth-pangs of a cosmic Prometheus rising out
of the long nightmare of domesticated primate history Of
course, these are genetic/historical generalizations which do
not precisely match any specific family. The gracious
goddess/ hostile giant archetypes are not activated in cases
where the mother is cold, rejecting, embittered etc. and the
father is the warm, supportive figure. The imprints on the
first and second circuits are statistically deviant in such
families and anything may result—a shaman, a
schizophrenic, a genius, a homosexual, an artist, a
psychologist, etc.
EXERCISE
In terms of the theory so far developed, analyze the
following characters:
1. Scarlett O' Hara
2. King Kong
3. Odysseus
4. Hamlet
5. Bugs Bunny
6. Portnoy
7. Leopold Bloom
8. Richard M. Nixon
9. Thomas Jefferson
10. St. Paul
11. Donald Duck
12 lago
13. Jane Eyre
14. Josef Stalin
15. Joan of Arc
16. Timothy Leary
17. Aleister Crowley
18. The Author
19. Mao
20. Carl Jung
21. The Secret Chiefs
22. Hannibal Lecter, M.D.
23. You

CHAPTER SIX
THE TIME-BINDING SEMANTIC CIRCUIT
It says that when you put two minds together, there is
always a third mind, a third and superior mind, as an
unseen collaborator.
— William S. Burroughs and Brion Gysin, The Third Mind

The third semantic circuit handles artifacts and makes a
"map" (reality tunnel) which can be passed on to others,
even across generations.
These "maps" may be paintings, blueprints, words,
concepts, tools (with instructions on use transmitted
verbally), theories, music, etc.
Human beings (domesticated primates) are symbol-using
creatures; which means, as the pioneer semanticist,
Korzybski, noted, that those who rule symbols, rule us.
If Moses, Confucius, Buddha, Mohammed, Jesus and St.
Paul can be considered living influences—and they are: look
around the world—this is only because their Signal has
been carried to us by human symbol systems. These
systems include words, artworks, music, rituals and
unrecognized rituals ("games") through which culture is
transmitted. Marx and Hitler, Newton and Socrates,
Shakespeare and Jefferson, etc. continue to "rule" parts of
humanity in the same way—through the semantic circuit.
We are ruled even more, and even less consciously, by the
inventors of the wheel, the plow, the alphabet, even the
Roman roads.
Since words contain both denotations (referents in the
sensory-existential world) and connotations (emotional
tones and poetic or rhetorical hooks), humans can be
moved to action even by words which have no real meaning
or reference in actuality.
This is the mechanism of demagoguery, advertising and
much of organized religion.
The bio-survival circuit only divides experience into two
sets: that which is good for me or nourishing, and that
which is bad for me or threatening. The emotional-territorial
circuit also divides the world into two halves: that which is
more powerful than me (higher in the pecking order) and
that which is less powerful than me (lower in the pecking
order). On this basis socio-biological systems evolve and
animal "societies" of truly human complexity have been
studied.
The semantic circuit allows us to sub-divide things, and
reconnect things, at pleasure. There is no end to its busybusybusy labeling and packaging of experience. On the
personal level, this is the "internal monologue" discovered
by Joyce in Ulysses. On the historical level, this is the timebinding function described by Korzybski, which allows each
generation to add new categories to our mental library—
connecting new things, separating new things, reclassifying
and reshuffling forever. In this time-binding dimension.
Einstein replaced Newton before most of the world1 had
heard of Newton; simple arithmetic gave
1 Most of the world was illiterate until the 1970s.

HUMAN BEINGS ARE TIME-BINDERS

birth to algebra, which brought forth calculus, which
produced tensor calculus, etc. Haydn and Mozart prepared
the way for Beethoven, who broke into the realms that the
Romantics and Wagnerians took over, which gave birth to
what is called music today.
So-called "future shock" has always been with us, since the
semantic circuit began functioning somewhere in prehistory. In a symbolizing, calculating, abstracting species,
all times are "times of change." The process is however
accelerating faster as time passes, because the symbolizing
faculty is inherently selfaugmenting.
In ordinary language, the semantic circuit is usually called
"the mind." (As psychologist Robert Ornstein said in a
recent radio show, when we say someone "has a good
mind," we generally mean they have a good mouth, i.e.,
they use the semantic circuit well.)
In terms of Transactional Analysis, the first (oral) circuit is
called the Natural Child, the second (emotional) circuit is
called the Adapted Child, and the semantic circuit is called
the Adult or Computer. In Jungian terms, the first circuit
mediates sensation, the second circuit feeling, and the third
circuit reason.
The neurological components of the first circuit go back to
the oldest parts of the brain; Carl Sagan called these
functions "the reptile brain." These neural structures are at
least billions of years old. The second circuit structures
appeared with the first amphibians and mammals,
somewhere around 1000 million or 500 million years ago;
Sagan called them "the mammalian brain." The semantic
circuit appeared perhaps 100 thousand years ago; Sagan
called it "the human brain." It should be no surprise that

most people, most of the time, are controlled more by the
older reptilian-mammalian circuits than by the human
semantic (rational) circuit, or that the semantic circuit is so
easily perverted into false logics (bigotries, intolerant
ideologies, fanaticisms of all sorts) when the bio-survival
circuit signals threat to life or the emotional circuit flashes
threat to status.
Cynics, satirists and "mystics" (circuit V-VIII types) have
told us over and over that "reason is a whore," i.e., that the
semantic circuit is notoriously vulnerable to manipulation by
the older, more primitive circuits. However much the
Rationalist may resent this, it is always true in the short
run—that is, to use one of the Rationalist's favorite words,
it is always pragmatically true. Whoever can scare people
enough (produce bio-survival anxiety) can sell them quickly
on any verbal map that seems to give them relief, i.e., cure
the anxiety. By frightening people with Hell and then
offering them Salvation, the most ignorant or crooked
individuals can "sell" a whole system of thought that cannot
bear two minutes of rational analysis. And any
domesticated primate alpha male, however cruel or
crooked, can rally the primate tribe behind him by howling
that a rival alpha male is about to lead his gang in an attack
on this habitat. These two mammalian reflexes are known,
respectively, as Religion and Patriotism. They work for
domesticated primates, as for the wild primates, because
they are Evolutionary Relative Successes. (So far.)
The emotional-territorial or "patriotic" circuit also contains
the pack's status programs or pecking order. Working in
tandem with first-circuit bio-survival anxieties, it is always
able to pervert the functioning of the semantic-rational
circuit. Whatever threatens loss of status, and whatever
invades one's "space" (including one's ideological "head
space"), is a threat to the average domesticated primate.
Thus, if a poor man has one status prop in his life—"I'm a
white man, not a goddam nigger" or "I'm normal, not a
goddam faggot" or whatever—any attempt to preach1
tolerance, common humanity, relativism, etc. is not
processed through the semantic circuit but through the
emotional circuit, and is rejected as an attack on status
(ego, social role).
The attentive reader will remember that the grid of the first
two circuits puts the pre-verbal child in a two-dimensional
world, which in the simplest of our diagrams looked like
this:

Thus, there is a neurological basis for the linkage between
mapping and manipulating. The right hand manipulates the
universe (and makes artifacts) and the left-brain maps the
results into a model, which allows for predictions about
future behavior of that part of the universe. These are the
distinctly human (postprimate) characteristics.
The left-handed, on the contrary, specialize in right-brain
functions, which are holistic, supra-verbal, "intuitive,"
musical and "mystical." Leonardo, Beethoven and
Nietzsche, for instance, were all left-handed. Traditionally,
left-handed people have been the subject of both dread and
awe—regarded as weird, shamanic, and probably in special
communication with "God" or "the Devil."1
There is thus a cross-over which makes for a left-right
polarity in both brain-functioning and hand-functioning,
each being a reverse mirror image of the other:
Left Brain
(analysis)
(Circuit III)

Right Brain
(intuition)
(Circuit VI)

Left Hand

Right Hand

This double (and reversed) right-left polarity places us
neurologically in three-dimensional space. Rearranging our
diagram and adding the third circuit, we can illustrate the
mind-field as follows:

Of course, preaching itself is bad second circuit politics, since it
puts you one-up on the person preached-at. You are not one-up
unless imprinted as such by being an alpha male in the same
gene-pool or conditioned as such by being a "boss" or other
authority-figure. The counter-culture of the 1960s, like many
other idealistic movements, failed because it did so much
preaching from a morally one-up position when nobody had
been imprinted or conditioned to accept it as one-up.

DOMINATE
RETREAT

ADVANCE
SUBMIT

The third, semantic circuit seems intimately connected with
three dimensionality (although our binocular vision, of
course, also plays a role here). Specifically, righthandedness is a human, or at least a primate, trait. Other
mammals show no right-hand preference; they are
ambidextrous.
Recent neurology has shown that our right-handedness is
intimately connected with our tendency to use the left
hemisphere of the brain more than the right. (The lefthanded minority are discussed below). Indeed, we use the
right hemisphere so little in ordinary life that for a long time
it was called "the silent hemisphere."
Thus, there is a genetic (hard-wired) preference, in most
humans, for right-handed manipulations and left-brain
mentations.
Now these connections seem intimately involved with our
verbal, semantic circuitry, because the left brain is the
"talking" brain. It is linear, analytical, computer-like and
very verbal.

To visualize this two-dimensional sketch of a threedimensional system it is necessary to imagine that the
advance-retreat
1 Aleister Crowley knew about this pragmatically, before
modern neurology.
He taught his pupils to learn to write equally well with both
hands, thereby forcing the dormant right brain to spring to
activity.

axis is at right angles to the others—that is, "see" it coming
out of the page at you.
This is "Euclidean" space. It is obvious, in this context, why
Euclidean space was the first kind of space discovered by
mathematicians, and by artists, and why it still seems
"natural" to us; why some have great difficulty in imagining
the non-Euclidean kinds of space used in modern physics.
Euclidean space is a projection outward of the way our
nervous systems stacks information on the bio-survival,
emotional and semantic circuits.
Thus, the imprint sites of this circuit are located in the left
cortex and closely linked with the delicate muscles of larynx
and the fine manipulations of right-handed "dexterity." The
cortex itself is so recent in evolution that it is often called

"the new brain"; it is found only in the higher mammals and
is most developed in humans and cetaceans (dolphins and
whales).
Those extreme cases who take their heaviest imprint on the
third circuit tend to grow up cerebrotonic. They are tall and
skinny, because energy is perpetually drawn upward from
the body into the head. The caricatured evil genius, Dr.
Syvlanus in Superman, who was virtually all head,
represents the extreme toward which this type seems to be
evolving. Popular speech calls them "eggheads."
Almost always, these cerebrotonic Third-Circuit types ignore
or are hostile to their first and second circuit functions.
Playfulness puzzles them (appears silly or eccentric) and
emotions both baffle and frighten them.
Since we all contain this circuit, we all need to exercise it
regularly. Make up a schematic diagram of your business or
home and try to streamline it for more efficiency. Design a
chart that explains the whole universe. Every few years,
study a science you know nothing about, at an Adult
Education center.
And don't neglect to play with this circuit: write poems,
jingles, fables, proverbs or jokes.
REMEMBER, MR. CROWLEY SAID:
YOU TOO ARE A STAR
P.S. HE ALSO SAID:
DO NOT LUST AFTER RESULTS

Thus, a genius is one who, by some internal process,
breaks through to Circuit VII—a minor neurological miracle
loosely called "intuition"—and comes back down to the third
circuit with the capacity to paint a new semantic map, build
a new model of experience. Needless to say, this is always
a profound shock to those still trapped in the old robotimprints, and is generally considered a threat to territory
(ideological head space). The long list of martyrs to free
enquiry, from Socrates onward, shows how mechanical this
neophobia (fear of new semantic signals) is.
As Thomas Kuhn showed in The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions science itself—the apotheosis of third-circuit
semantic rationality—is not free of this neophobia. Kuhn
demonstrated, at length, that each scientific revolution took
one full generation to turn over the old world view. And
Kuhn further showed that the older scientists never are
converted to the new semantic paradigm. They are, in our
terminology, mechanically hooked to their original imprints.
The revolution is complete, as Kuhn shows, only when a
second generation, not hooked to the old imprint, is able to
compare the two models and decides rationally that the
newer one really does make more sense.
But if science, the most self-correcting of all information
processing third-circuit functions, has this one-generation
time lag, what can be said of politics, religion, economics?
Time-lags of centuries, or even millenniums, are common
there.'
We commented earlier that in bio-survival neurology, there
is no time. "I just found myself doing it," we say after
passing through an automatic reflex on the bio-survival
circuit.
This only refers to other people's politics, religions and
economics, needless to sag. The reader's own opinions on these
subjects are the only reasonable and objective ones. Of course.

VISCEROTONIC
Extreme
Circuit I Imprint
Jung’s feeling type
“Natural Type”

MUSCULOTONIC
Extreme
Circuit II Imprint
Jung’s sensational type
“Adapted Type”

CEREBROTONIC
Extreme
Circuit III Imprint
Jung’s rational type
“Adult” or “Computer”
THE NEUROLOGICAL IMPRINT IS THE BLUEPRINT
FOR THE ENTIRE ORGANISM.
As with the earlier circuits, the semantic circuit builds all of
its conditioning and learning onto a bedrock of hard-wired
imprinting. Thus, many existentially thinkable thoughts are
socially unthinkable, since (a) everybody in a given society
has roughly the same semantic imprint and (b) this is
reinforced daily by assumptions that are mechanically taken
for granted.

Emotional-territorial circuit actions begin to include time as
a factor. Dominance signals may not "work": the seemingly
weaker mammal may offer a counter-challenge. Two dogs
will walk around each other for several minutes growling
and sniffing (the chemical secretions of each reveals its
actual degree of fear to the other) before Top Dog and
Bottom Dog becomes clear.
On the human level, we often agonize over emotional
decisions, becoming acutely conscious of time as we
hesitate. As every suspense writer knows, the principle way
to increase emotional tension is to set a time limit on a
difficult or dangerous decision. (See any Star Trek script;
the time-limit is never missing. Or see any of Irving
Wallace's bestsellers. Suspense is always increased, of
course, if the time-limit is abruptly shortened just before
the climax.)
On the third circuit, time becomes conceptualized as well as
experienced. We know ourselves as creatures of time; the
"tale of the tribe," the totem pole, the Odyssey of Homer,
the Old Testament, the Vedas, etc. tell us what came before
and often contains prophecies of what will come later.
Science expands the third circuit into contemplation of
time-spans that stagger our imaginations. The very use of
written languages and other symbols like mathematics
creates the time-binding sense of Korzybski: we know
ourselves as receivers of messages sent by sages "of olde"
and as potential transmitters of messages that may be
scanned ages in the future.
The fourth circuit causes us to be even more involved in,
and pressured by, time.
In closing this chapter let us be reminded that Giordano
Bruno was burned at the stake February 18, 1600, for
teaching that the earth moves. Was he guilty or not?
EXERCISES
1. If you are a Liberal, subscribe to the National Review,
the country's most intelligent (and witty) conservative
magazine, for a year. Each month try to enter their realitytunnel for a few hours while reading their articles.
2. If you are a Conservative, subscribe to the New York
Review of Books for a year and try to get into their headspace for a few hours a month.
3. If you are a Rationalist, subscribe to Fate magazine for a
year.
4. If you are an occultist, join the Committee for the
Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal and
read their journal, The Skeptical Inquirer, for a year.

5. Buy a copy of the Scientific American and read any
article in it. Ask the following questions: Why do they sound
so sure?
Does the data support dogmatism at this point, or is dogma
a primate habit (defending head-space)? Will these theories
still be believed in 2011? In 2593?
6. Get into a discussion of philosophy with an educated
Marxist, an intelligent Moslem and a Japanese businessman
at the first opportunity.
7. Buy some ZOOM or LIFT (two names for the same
caffeine- high stimulant) at a Health Food Store. (This gives
a close approximation of the effects of illegal cocaine.)
When you are Zooming or Lifted and your mind is racing,
find a victim and explain the universe to him or her, until
they are able to escape you.
What you experience in this "speed rap" is what the head of
the compulsive Rationalist is always like. This is the verbal
circuit gone wild and totally oblivious to information coming
in on any other circuit. It explains why most people cannot
stand Rationalists. "Speed" drugs evidently trigger neurotransmitters characteristic of the verbal centers of the left
cortex.

CHAPTER SEVEN
THE TIME-BINDING DIALECTIC:
ACCELERATION & DECELERATION
In the dialectic between nature and the socially constructed
world, the human organism is transformed. In this dialectic
man produces reality and thereby produces himself.
— Berger and Luckman, The Social Construction of Reality
The first and second circuits are Evolutionary Stable
Strategies.
They have worked, in more or less the same form, not just
for primates but for other mammals, and for many other
species, over vast aeons of time.
The third, semantic circuit is an Evolutionary Unstable
Strategy.
It could very accurately be called revolutionary rather than
evolutionary.
The first two-circuits are based on negative feedback, in the
biological sense. They maintain hotneostasis —that is, they
return, over and over, to the same ecological-ethological
balances.
The function of negative feedback is to return to such a
steady state.
The time-binding semantic circuit is not based on such
steady-state positive feedback. It is a mechanism of what
cyberneticists and biologists called positive feedback. It
does not return to a steady state, but constantly seeks a
new equilibrium at a higher energy level. (Negative
feedback returns to a fixed point, like a thermostat. Positive
feedback seeks a moving goal, like a guided missile.)
The first two circuits maintain that which is (more or less)
constant in human affairs. They are totally cyclical, and
relate directly to the cycles found in history by Vico, Hegel
and similar philosophers.
The third circuit has always been hemmed-in and heavily
sanctioned with rules, laws, prohibitions, taboos, etc.
because it breaks up such cycles. It leads, if unleashed, to
an upwardhurtling spiral.
In societies where .the third, semantic circuit has been
partially unleashed—it has never been totally freed in any
society—the upward spiral immediately appears. This used
to be known as "progress," before that word became
unfashionable.
The upward spiral (whether we call it "progress" or not) is
characteristic of what Karl Popper calls Open Societies.
These are secular, humanistic societies—cultures relatively
free of taboo and dogmatism.
Such freedom, up to and including the present, is only
relative, because many taboos are unconscious and pass
themselves off as "common sense" or "common decency,"
etc. Whoever challenges them is by definition a "heretic,"
by definition a "traitor," or by definition "an irresponsible
nut." (Rationalists, who dominate in relatively Open
Societies, also have their own taboos, as we shall see.)
It was historian Henry Adams who first conceived the idea
that there might be a mathematical expression describing
the rate of change of human societies.

Under the influence of Newton's physics, Adams
suggested— and he was very tentative about this: a fact to
be remembered by those who ridicule his "naivete"—that
the utilization of energy might move forward as the inverse
square of time just as Newton's gravity functions as the
inverse square of distance.
Accepting the anthropology of his day, Adams assumed
humanity in its present form was about 90,000 plus years
old. He then reckoned that it took most of that time to
arrive at Galileo, the scientific method, the beginnings of
the Industrial Revolution, and the great leap forward in
energy utilization characteristic of the "modern" age, or the
Open Society.
Since 300 is the inverse square of 90,000, Adams assumed
that the next great leap was happening while he was
writing, around 1900—300 years after Galileo. Looking
about him, he decided this next jump to higher energy was
occurring in the researches of the Curies, :who had
discovered radioactivity. As many commentators have
noted, it is impossible to read Adams on this subject
without feeling that he is very accurately forecasting the
Atomic Age.
Adams went further, with the exhilaration of a great idea.
Since 17 plus is the inverse square of 300, he predicted
that the next great evolutionary stage would begin in 1917
plus. And, since the inverse square of 17 is 4 plus, he
predicted the next step in around 1922. By then, he said,
we should have infinite energy at our disposal. It didn't
quite work out that way.
Nevertheless, Henry Adams was on the right track. His
math was just over-simplified.
Also "on the right track" was Henry's brother, Brooks, who
was also looking for "laws" in history. Brooks observed a
pattern which may or may not be entirely true but is as
approximately true as the similar generalizations of Vico,
Hegel, Marx and Toynbee. Every civilization, Brooks Adams
proposed, goes through four stages:
1.The monopolization of knowledge by priests. E.g., the
Egyptian priests kept written language a secret among
themselves, as did the May an priests.
2. The monopolization of military power by conquerors who
made themselves States or governments. E.g., "a French
bastard" (Tom Paine's description of William the Conqueror)
lands on the shore of England with a superior technology—
warriors on horse versus native warriors on foot—and he
becomes King. His relatives and sycophants become Lordsof-the-land.
3. The monopolization of the land by these land-Lords. The
extraction of tribute ("rent") from those who live on the
land.
4. The monopolization of the issue of currency by National
Banks. The extraction of tribute ("interest") for each piece
of currency put into circulation.
Most civilizations seem to have gone through at least three
of these stages, not always consecutively. Some have
passed through all four.
Brooks Adams also noted that centralized capital (the
accumulation of wealth in the hands of a few inter-related
families) seems to have been moving steadily West
throughout recorded history. The first major accumulations
are to be found in Sumer; the center of money-power then
shifted to Egypt, to Greece, to the Italian peninsula, to
various parts of Germany, and then to London. At the time
Brooks Adams was writing (c. 1900) he saw the balance
teetering between London and New York, and he predicted
that the decline of the English Empire would shift the
balance to New York within the first half of the 20th
Century. He seems to have been right. Brooks Adams had
no theory as to why this Westward movement of wealth
had been going on for 6000 years. He merely observed the
pattern.
The shift is still continuing, in the opinion of many. For
instance, Carl Oglesby in The Cowboy vs. Yankee War, sees
American politics since 1950 dominated by a struggle
between "old Yankee wealth" (the New York-Boston axis,
which replaced London after 1900) and "new Cowboy
wealth" (Texas- California oil-and-aerospace billionaires).
As of 1997, it looks like the Cowboys are winning; which is
what one would expect if there were a real "law" behind
Adams' East-West migration of capital.

One night in 1919, Count Alfred Korzybski awoke from a
vivid dream, tears of joy streaming down his face, with a
vivid sense that the passing of signals from generation to
generation— the third circuit time-binding function—was
what distinguished us from the other primates.
Korzybski originally suggested that time-binding could be
defined mathematically. He dropped this idea later—his
math was as inadequate as Henry Adam's—but it is worth
looking at for a moment, to retrace the steps by which the
actual Law of Acceleration was discovered.
What Korzybski assumed at first was that if all the
inventions, discoveries, etc. of some hypothetical first
generation of humans could be represented by P, and the
rate by which the second generation could surpass this by
R, then, mathematically, the sum total of inventions,
discoveries etc. at the end of the second generation would
be PR. Quite true, algebraically. Then, after a third
generation, the stockpile would be PRR. And after four
generations, PRRR.
Generalized, this becomes PRt, where (t) is the number of
generations from whatever generation you have picked as
your base-line.
The curve of PRt, if you put it on graph paper, ascends
more rapidly with each generation. Korzybski was looking
straight at what Alvin Toffler later called "Future Shock" and
was trying to write a mathematical formula for it.
Many variables in economic-technological history do, in
fact, fit Korzybski's PRt function; but others do not. The
math, again, was too simple; and everything does not
change at the same rate.
Nonetheless, Korzybski, like Henry Adams, was groping
toward the truth: acceleration is real, and it is intimately
connected with time-binding, the passing of signals
between generations.
What underlies the accelerations noted by Henry Adams
and Korzybski is nowadays known as the selection of
negentropy out of stochastic processes. Our understanding
of this is chiefly due to almost-simultaneous discoveries
(1946-48) by quantum physicist Erwin Schrodinger,
mathematician Norbert Weiner and an electronicscommunication expert at Bell Laboratories, Claude
Shannon.
A stochastic process is a random series, but it is a special
kind of random series. In a stochastic process, some agent
or agency is making selections—picking out of the
randomness a pattern that is not random.
A pattern that its not random is known mathematically as
information.
Information can also be defined as organization, or as
coherence.
Gregory Bateson has defined information as "differences
that make a difference."
Information—coherence—"differences
that
make
a
difference"— Korzybski's Time-Binding—these are all
aspects of the unpredictable. If you know something
already, or can predict it easily on the basis of what you do
know, it is not information for you. Conversely, if you don't
know something, or can't predict it, it is information.
The dynamism of evolution, we repeat, is the selection of
information, coherence, out of a random series of events.
The emergence of information can be illustrated crudely by
the following three poemlets:
Roses are red
Violets are blue
Sugar is sweet
And so are you
Unless the reader has lived in relative isolation from
American- English folk-culture, this poem had very little
information for him. You could guess what was coming
every step of the way. But consider by contrast:
Roses are red
Ink is black
Do me a favor
Go sit on a tack
This crude jest (of grade school origin) has more
information for more readers, because it is less predictable.
Another leap in information-content occurs in Steve Alien's:
Roses are red
Violets are blue
You think this will rhyme

But it ain't gonna
The humorous unpredictability of this poem gives it,
mathematically, a higher information level than the
predictable Valentine poem we started with. If this is still
obscure, try it in terms of Bateson's elegant simplification:
"Information is difference that makes a difference."
Information is also known mathematically as negative
entropy or, in a widely used abbreviation, negentropy.
Entropy is a measure of the deadness of a system.
Negentropy or information is a measure of the liveliness of
a system.
Evolution is always a matter of at least two stochastic
processes, each one acting as "selector" of the other(s).
That is, in non-living systems, where no such "selection" is
involved, entropy (lack of coherence) steadily increases, as
stated in the famous Second Law of Thermodynamics. In
living systems, due to stochastic co-selection, negentropy
(information) steadily increases. In Schrodinger's phrase,
"Life feeds on negative entropy."
Life is an ordering, selecting, coherence-making process.
Without getting embroiled in metaphysics, life (evolution)
behaves as if it were always aiming at higher coherence,
i.e., higher intelligence.
This process accelerates because it is, as Shannon
demonstrated mathematically, logarithmic. Logarithmic
processes are such that if you put them on graph paper,
the curve rises more and more all the time.
Hence, the accelerations noted by Adams and Korzybski are
human increments in a process that has been innate in
evolution all along.
The human increment accelerates faster than pre-human
evolution because through the third, semantic circuit and its
symbols (words, maps, equations etc.) we are able to pass
information (negative entropy: coherence) from generation
to generation.
World-wide wealth in terms of "Real Capital" (plants in
operation, actual known resources etc.) has been doubling
every generation since economists started collecting
statistics in the 18th Century.
Where does this wealth come from'? According to orthodox
economists it comes from land, labor, and capital.
According to Marxists, it comes from land and labor alone,
and the capitalist is a thief who has inserted an artificial
bookkeeping system into the process. Both are wrong. Land
and labor alone, and land, labor and capital together, can't
produce new wealth if they are all organized by a fallacious
idea, such as searching for oil where oil is not. The real
source of wealth is correct ideas: workable ideas:
that is, negative entropy—Information.
The origin of these coherent (workable) ideas is the human
nervous system. All wealth is created by human beings
using their neurons intelligently.
A neurotic young man once went to a Zen Master and asked
how he could find peace of mind.
"How can you lack anything," the Roshi asked "when you
own the greatest treasure in the universe?"
"How do I own the greatest treasure in the universe?"
asked the young man, baffled.
"The place that question comes from is the greatest
treasure in the universe," said the Master, being more
explicit than is common for a Zen teacher.
Of course, as a Buddhist, the Master had taken a vow of
poverty and did not mean exactly what we mean here. But
he knew that the brain produces all that we experience—all
our pain and worry, all our bliss states and ecstasies, all our
higher evolutionary vistas and trans-time Peak Experiences,
etc. It is also "the greatest treasure in the universe" in the
most materialistic economic sense: it creates all the ideas
which, socially employed, become wealth: roads, scientific
laws, calendars, factories, computers, life-saving drugs,
medicines, ox-carts, autos, jet planes, spaceships...
If you are not alone in the wilderness, lift your eyes from
the page and look about. All that you see, whoever
theoretically "owns" it, is the time-binding product of the
materialized or manifested ideas of creative men and
women. It is all negative entropy. Coherent order.
And it is moving toward higher and more coherent order at
a faster rate-of-change all the time.
Of course, if you are alone in the wilderness, you will also
see coherent order, but in this case, the rate-of-change

toward higher order is much slower. That is, those
stochastic processes which we call genetic drift, evolution
etc. are co-selecting higher order at a different time rate
than those stochastic processes which we call human
thought, invention, culture etc. (This is why it is so hard to
reach agreement about whether the natural processes are
intelligent or not. As Bateson points out, if we accept any
ordering process as intelligent, then the biosphere is indeed
intelligent; but if we save the word "intelligence" only for
those ordering processes that move at the same speed as
our brains, then Nature is merely mechanical, not
intelligent. To an extra-terrestrial with a different timesense than ours, this question would not arise at all.)
Most of what we perceive in the human environment is
made up of concretized ideas, in the above sense. Look
again at a human community; you are seeing the historical
human mind manifesting itself.
All ideas are not equally good, of course.
All manifested ideas (human creations in the biosphere)
are, therefore, not equally good.
This is why John Ruskin, a century ago, tried to introduce a
distinction between wealth and illth. This distinction did not
become accepted and incorporated into our language
because people, at that time, were not ready for it.
Wealth, in Ruskin's sense, consists of all those artifacts
(concretized ideas) which enhance human life, or life
generally.
Illth consists of those artifacts which destroy, demean or
degrade life. A factory that pollutes the air or water is illth
in this sense; so is a bomb, a sword, a pistol, a tank of
nerve-gas. The Westward migration of Capital noted by
Brooks Adams was a migration of both wealth and illth.
Obviously, under primitive planetary conditions—finite
space and finite resources—the illth was perceived as
necessary to protect the wealth. Territorial politics are
much the same among domesticated primates as among
other mammals; the primates are just smarter at building
more omni-lethal weapons faster.
This was originally a survival trait, an Evolutionary Relative
Success, because primates are born without the
physiological, inbuilt weaponry (lethal teeth, claws, horns
etc.) of other mammals.
Since the Age of Reason in the 18th Century, the
exponential increase in wealth (life-enhancing ideas
manifesting) has led to more and more Utopian yearnings.
At the same time, the equal and opposite increase in illth
has led to more and more dystopian and apocalyptical
fears.

CAPITAL
HAS
MOVED
STEADILY
WESTWARD
BECAUSE NEW IDEAS ALWAYS APPEAR ON THE
EXPANDING WAVE

One's expectations about the future—Utopia or dystopia—
are always based on what one thinks is the dominant force
in evolution.
This whole book, not just the present chapter, is based on
the belief that an overview of evolution shows beyond all
doubt that wealth-producing faculty (the search for higher
coherence) is the deciding factor. The illth-producing faculty
is an archaic mammalian survival system rapidly becoming
obsolete.
The highest historical concentration of wealth (real capital,
and ideas generating new capital) now co-exists with the
highest concentration of evolutionarily advanced nervous
systems.
In California, Oregon, Alaska, British Columbia. Arizona,
Texas, the Hawaiian Islands, Japan and all around the
Pacific, where East meets West, the world of 2000 and
2010 and 2050 is being created by persons who are
veterans of a gigantic Neurological Revolution—the
psychedelic pioneers of the 1960s, the graduates of the
Consciousness
Movement
of
the
1950s-70s,
the
synthesizers of modern psychology and ancient Oriental
mindsciences.
These persons are called the Aquarian Conspiracy by
Marilyn Ferguson, one of their spokespersons. They are
denounced as the Me Generation by Tom Wolfe, a timetraveler from New York, i.e., from the neurological past,
from a culture crystallized before 1950.
This "Me Generation" is the temporary high water mark of
the time-binding function. Moving steadily Westward—away
from Tradition, away from Dogma—they are the products,
as Edmund Burke said of the first Americans, of "the
dissidence of dissent and the Protestantism of the
Protestants." Every heresy that left Europe produced newer,
wilder heresies in the Eastern Seaboard, 1600-1800. Those
that were "too far out" had to move further West and
produced the 1000 Utopian communities (anarchist,
evangelical, free-love, etc.) that were attempted in the
mid-West during the 19th Century. Those who were even
further "out"—out of the traditional mode—moved further
Westward in the last 30-70 years.
All of the fallout of this migration seems weird to the
Eastern states, and even weirder to Europeans.
It all became much weirder still when it hit the Pacific and
began to interact with Oriental neuro-sciences and brainchange arts, like yoga and Taoism and Zen.
It swallowed the Oriental lessons whole, without becoming
Oriental entirely. It remained Western—the dissidence of
dissent etc.—and it has been gaining momentum and
direction for two or three decades now.
It aims at Higher Coherence and Higher Intelligence.
This is the new Power Elite.
As youngsters, these Aquarian Conspirators made the Youth
Revolution of the 1960s, which—whatever its excesses and
blunders—permanently changed and improved studentadministrator- teacher feedback in our universities;
liberated our Puritan culture for some healthy hedonism;
imported a dozen varieties of Oriental neuro-science (and
two dozen varieties of Oriental humbug, alas); launched the
ecology movement (the first planetwide perception of the
difference between wealth and illth); recreated a true love
of the wilderness and of wild creatures:
pioneered flex-time and other liberations from economic
robothood; 1 launched Women's Lib, Gay Lib, Child Lib and
generously supported Black Lib; ended the Vietnam War;
spread holistic medicine throughout our culture; etc.
The same group is now leading the computer revolution;
spearheading the drive toward Space Migration; supporting
the Hunger Project, which will abolish starvation in our
lifetimes; leading the Longevity revolution and the search
for immortality; etc.
And they are all very conscious of being part of the
Intelligence Intensification explosion which is the major
topic of this book.
This type of "Western progressivism" (or Utopianism) came
out of the mid-East and is the distinct contribution of the
Jews, which is why all reactionaries are intuitively antiSemitic. As William Blake wrote of this tradition:
The Prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel dined with me, and I asked
them how they dared so roundly to assert that God spoke
to them; and whether they did not think at the time that

they would be misunderstood & so be the cause of
imposition.
Isaiah answer'd: 'I saw no God, nor heard any, in a finite
organical perception; but my senses discover'd the infinite
in everything, and as I was then persuaded & remain
confirmed that the voice of honest indignation is the voice
of God, I cared not for consequences, but wrote.'
This vision of the infinite in everything is common to East
and West; what is distinctly Western, out of the Jews, is the
voice of honest indignation against every institution which
would deny or demean the infinity within each human soul.
The release of our full human potential—to let the light of
Prometheus shine everywhere—is the distinctly Western
mystic tradi-

6. Research how many years passed between the
publication of Einstein's paper on Special Relativity and the
acceptance of the idea by the majority of physicists.

CHAPTER EIGHT
THE "MORAL" SOCIOSEXUAL CIRCUIT
As the caterpillar chooses the fairest leaves to lay her eggs
on, so the priest lays his curse on the fairest joys.
-William Blake, Marriage of Heaven & Hell

Virtually all the computer manufacturing firms in Silicon Valley
(the peninsula south of San Francisco) have flex-time. The
employees choose their own working hours.

tion and does not appear in Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism or
any Eastern religion.
Thomas Jefferson developed his view that "all men are
created equal" from the perception of the infinity within
each of us, which he learned from the Scottish
philosophers, Reid and Hutcheson. (It was also from
Hutcheson that Jefferson got his idea of "unalienable
rights," which Congress in the interest of stylistic elegance
altered to "inalienable rights.") The Scottish Enlightenment,
like the French and English Enlightenment, was the
beginning of the materialization and manifestation of the
Judeo-Christian vision of the Heavenly City.
It was also this 18th Century Illuminati circle which
introduced the concept of progress—the conscious
formulation of the symbolism of Prometheus. This vision
has been under so much attack in recent decades that to
defend it at all will seem archaic and eccentric to many
readers.
Nonetheless, evolution is real: quantum jumps do occur
throughout the biosphere and throughout human
intellectual history. We are riding a mounting tidal wave of
rising consciousness and expanding intelligence which is
accelerating whether we like it or not.
By and large, most people—and especially most ruling
elites—have not liked this acceleration factor. The migration
of capital (i.e., ideas) Westward has been largely a flight
from oppression, an escapist movement—as critics today
describe Space as "escapist." Everywhere, everywhen, the
rulers of society have tried to put a brake on the third
circuit, to decelerate the acceleration function, to establish
limits on what was printable, discussable, even thinkable.
The Greek myth of Prometheus Bound—the Titan who
brought Light to humanity and is eternally punished for it—
is the synecdoche, the perfect symbol, of how the third
circuit has been handled in most human societies.
The peculiar way most societies have imprinted the fourth,
socio-sexual circuit—the weird taboos which restrain us all,
in every tribe, however technologically "advanced"—is part
of the acceleration-deceleration dialectic.
The fourth circuit has been largely imprinted to serve as a
brake, holding back the free activity of the time-binding
semantic circuit.
This is the historical function of taboos and "morality."
EXERCISES
1 . Compare Greece in the 4th Century BC, Rome in the
First Century AD, Southern Europe at the beginning of the
Renaissance, England c. 1600-1900, New York c. 19001950, and California today. Note the accumulation of wealth
corresponding to the accumulation of heresies, innovations,
cults, kooks, pioneers, inventors etc.
2. Imagine you put a penny on the first square of a
chessboard, two cents on the second square, four cents on
the third, etc. How much will you have to put on the sixtyfourth square'?
This is how time-binding works, in relatively Open Societies.
3. Read the denunciations of Galileo by the orthodox of his
time.
4. Read the denunciations of Beethoven, of Picasso, of
Joyce by those who knew in advance what music, painting
and novels should be.
5. Are the most important scientific ideas of 1997 going to
be published in Scientific American in 1997, or in 2017?

The socio-sexual circuit is activated and imprinted at
adolescence, when the DNA signal awakens the sexual
apparatus. The teenager becomes the bewildered possessor
of a new body and a new neural circuit oriented to orgasm
and sperm-egg fusion. The pubescent human, like any
other rutting animal, lurches about in a state of mating
frenzy, every call gasping for the sexual object.
Imprint vulnerability is acute, and the first sexual signals to
turn on the adolescent nervous system remain fixed for life
and forever define the individual's sexual reality.
We should not be surprised, therefore, at the various
fetishes that are so easily acquired at these sensitive
moments.
In fact, we can tell precisely at what period in time a person
was sexually imprinted by noting which fetishes continue to
turn him or her on. Black garters, booze, cool jazz, and
crew cuts define the sexual signals of one imprint group
(generation) just as rigidly as sleeping hags, marijuana,
heavy rock and tight jeans define another.
As Masters and Johnson have pointed out, most sexual
dysfunctions are hooked into the nervous system at these
adolescent moments of acute imprint vulnerability; their
archetypal case is that of a male who, about to mate for the
first time, in the back seat of a car, was traumatized by a
policeman flashing a light on him and his paramour. The
imprint of that ghastly moment was hooked for decades:
the male remained impotent until reimprinted by Masters
and Johnson in their clinic.
The choices of heterosexuality or homosexuality, brash
promiscuity or timid celibacy, etc. are usually imprinted by
exactly similar accidents at points of imprint vulnerability.
Just as biosurvival anxiety or security are imprinted by
accidents in the nursing period, emotional domination or
submission by accidents in the toddling period, symbolic
dexterity or "stupidity" by the accidents of the learning
environment.
Primitives (so-called) know these facts and surround all the
points of imprint vulnerability with rituals, "ordeals," "rites
of passage," etc. well designed to imprint the desired traits
of a well-integrated member of that tribe at that time.
Relics of these imprint ceremonies survive in Baptism,
Confirmation, Bar Mitzvahs, Marriage Ceremonies, the
Masonic "raising," etc.
It is important to realize that chance, genetics and malice
(anger) are among the "accidents" that create imprints at
the points of vulnerability.
Most humans do not, due to accidents of this sort, imprint
exactly the socio-sexual role demanded by their society.
The fourth circuit can almost be called the guilt circuit:
almost everybody, almost everywhere, is quite busy hiding
their real sexual profile and miming the "accepted" sex role
for their gender in their tribe.
In ordinary language, the imprint on the socio-sexual circuit
is generally called "the mature personality" or the "sexual

role." It is "the Parent" in the jargon of Transactional
Analysis.
It is amusing to note that Freud recognized the first circuit
as the oral stage, the second as the anal stage and the
fourth as the genital stage. He did not notice the third,
semantic circuit— perhaps because as an obsessive
Rationalist he was so absorbed in verbal and conceptual
programs that they were invisible to him, as water may be
to fishes. Similarly, Jung described the first circuit as the
sensational faculty, the second as the feeling faculty, the
third as the rational faculty—and skipped the sociosexual
circuit entirely. (There may be a clue here as to why Jung
could not abide Freud's fourth-circuit emphasis and built a
separate, less sexual psychology of his own.) Jung then
went on to lump all the higher circuits under the rubric of
the faculty of intuition.
It is the function of the nervous system to focus, to select,
to narrow down; to choose, from an infinity of possibilities,
the biochemical imprints which determine the tactics and
strategies that ensure survival in one place, status in one
tribe.
The infant is genetically prepared to learn any language,
master any skill, play any sex role; in a very short time,
however, he or she becomes mechanically, robotically,
fixated to accept, follow and mimic the limited offerings of
his social and cultural environment.
In this process, each of us pays a heavy price. Survival and
status mean forfeiting the infinite possibilities of
unconditioned consciousness. The domesticated primate,
inside the social reality- tunnel, is a trivial fragment of the
potentials for experience and intelligence innate in the
110,000000,000-cell human biocomputer.
As Robert A. Heinlein wrote:
A human being should be able to change a diaper, plan an
invasion, butcher a hog, design a building, conn a ship,
write a sonnet, balance accounts, build a wall, set a bone,
comfort the dying, take orders, give orders, cooperate, act
alone, solve an equation, analyze a new problem, pitch
manure, program a computer, cook a tasty meal, fight
efficiently, die gallantly.
Specialization is for insects.
But as long as we remain on the antique circuits we are not
very different from the insects. That is, just as the insects
repeat their four-stage program (egg, larvae, chrysalis,
adult) from generation to generation, we repeat our fourstage cycle also.
The antique circuits are genetically conservative. They
ensure the survival and continuation of the species, but do
no more. For future evolution we must look to the futuristic
circuits.

SPECIALIZATION IS FOR INSECTS

It is sometimes mistakenly stated that there are no
universal sexual taboos. This is not true. There is one omnipurpose taboo which exists in every tribe.
That taboo stipulates that sexuality shall not be unregulated
by the tribe. That is, even though no other taboos are
universal, the taboo against living without taboos remains
constant. Every tribe has its own set of verbots and thoushalt-nots, but no tribe allows the individual to choose his
or her own set.
An American President may not marry his own sister (if he
wants to get re-elected); an Egyptian Pharaoh had to marry
his own sister. Confronted by this moral relativism, many
social scientists have failed to notice the invariable: both
the President and the Pharaoh are expected to obey local
rules. So are the Samoan, the Russian, the Eskimo and the
Cuban.
Why is there this taboo against sexual self-definition and
selfactualization?
Why is it that, while no two societies can agree on what is
sexually "good" and sexually "bad," every society thinks
that it must make some definition?
1 The Gurdjieff titles are deliberately negative, since he was
trying to get people off these primitive circuits and into the
futuristic circuits.

The answer is that our first humanoid (symbolizing and
conceptualizing) ancestors were very ignorant, but not at all
stupid.
They were ignorant of the laws of genetics, but they were
smart enough to suspect that such laws exist. Sperm-egg
fusion is surrounded by violent taboos and fierce tribal
conformity because the survival and future evolution of the
gene pool depends upon which particular spermatozoa
reaches which particular ovum.
Etymologists confirm the Freudian theory that there are
ancient linkages between the words for the sacred, the
erotic, the obscene, the awe inspiring, the awe-ful, the
divine, the "thrilling." All of these are primitive, powerful
physiological responses to the mysteries of sexual
attraction, mating, reproduction, inheritance, genetic drift,
future evolution. The earliest god-forms found by
archeologists are pregnant goddesses and ithyphallic gods.
The most intolerant, bigoted and recalcitrant of all
prejudices—the
very
last
to
fade
away
after
cosmopolitanizing contact with other tribes having different
values—are the taboos concerning the right way to
reproduce. If one nation insists that the head of state must
marry his sister, and another insists that he must not, both
are acting on the assumption that the right way must be
found and rigorously enforced.
There are unknowns in the area of sexual attraction—He
likes Her, but She doesn't like Him.
There are unknowns in the area of mating—a young couple
can make love once, and the woman becomes pregnant,

yet another couple make love for three years and the
woman remains barren. Very puzzling and frightening for
primitives, in New Guinea or New Jersey.

GODS AND GODDESSES ARE SEXUAL AND GENETIC
PROGRAMS EXPRESSED IN PRIMITIVE SYMBOLS
There are unknowns in the area of reproduction—why
twins?
Why three boys in one family and three girls in another?
Why miscarriages and stillbirths?
There are unknowns in the area of inheritance—"Why
doesn't my son look like me?" many a domesticated
primate has wondered uneasily, leading to a great deal of
paranoia and male chauvinism.
There are unknowns in the area of genetic drift—modern
researchers recognize twelve or more variables, but still
have more questions than answers.
There are unknowns in the area of future evolution—"Where
do we come from, what are we, where are we going?", the
title of Gauguin's greatest painting, is the basic ontological
question; the totem-pole, like the treatise on sociobiology,
is an attempt to answer.
Amid all these unknowns—of sexual attraction, mating
reproduction, inheritance, genetic drift, future evolution—
the shamans of every tribe try to establish guide-posts to
tribal (gene-pool) survival.
Thus "morality" is invented.

reproduction. The latter case is represented by infanticide a
widespread birth-control measure always justified by the
local shamans on magical grounds, e.g., the infants
selected for sacrifice are breach births, or birth-marked, or
twins, or in some way stigmatized by the "gods." The actual
function of such practices, of course, is population control;
and such customs are most common on isolated islands
where runaway population would be a disaster. Similarly,
the Judaic taboos functioned to channel all sexuality into
increased population, since the ancient Jews were
surrounded by large and pugnacious Empires eager to
conquer them; they needed more boys for soldiers and
more girls to breed soldiers.
The most "idiotic" and "superstitious" taboos, from the
Rationalist viewpoint, always had some function when
invented.
For instance, the most "pointlessly" elaborate (non-genetic)
"incest" taboos, in which virtually everybody in the tribe
becomes unavailable sexually to everybody else, force
exogamy (marriage outside the tribe). This creates
affectional alliances (family ties) between tribes and
decreases warfare. Something like this primitive exogamy
survived into very recent times, in the custom of marrying
one royal family to another.
Every form of "morality" is, of course, irksome on some
level to everybody, because no individual ever has exactly
the sexual imprint desired by the tribe. The more
sophisticated totem-cults (the "higher" religions, so dubbed
by themselves) take account
1 That the whole chain is "intelligent" or manifests
"intelligence," is the Lamarckian heresy which Darwinians have
never quite been able to kill; every time it is buried, it rises
again in new form. Two most able recent arguments of the neoLamarckian or meta-Lamarckian position, which the reader is
cordially urged to read, are Timothy Leary's The Game of Life
and Gregory Bateson's Mind and Nature.

of this by the doctrine of atonement. In one form or
another, this allows the individual to be ritually "forgiven"
periodically for not being the perfect sexual robot decreed
by tribal morality.
This becomes hilarious only when one realizes that most of
what domesticated primates are asking their priests to
forgive them for consists of what Kinsey so accurately
called "normal mammalian behavior."1

SEXUAL ATTRACTION
MATING

“Morality”
REPRODUCTION

Local Taboos

INHERITANCE
GENETIC DRIFT
FUTURE EVOLUTION
Sexual attraction, mating, reproduction, inheritance,
genetic drift and future evolution are all stochastic
processes. (That is, processes in which, out of a random
series, some "intelligence" or something that can be
metaphorically conceived as an intelligence, is selecting a
final outcome.) That these stochastic processes overlap, as
shown in our diagram, is intuitively obvious; and it is also
obvious that the future is being "selected" every step of the
way.1 Taboo and morality are tribal attempts to govern the
random element—to select the desired future.
"Morality" attempts to control the stochastic evolutionary
process at two points—interfering between sexual attraction
and sexual consummation (Mating) by taboos and
commandments, or else interfering between mating and

Time-binding (the transmission of symbols and tools across
generations)
begins
on
the
third
circuit.
Acute
consciousness time is, however, intensified on the fourth
circuit.
1 This only refers to the silly and inferior religions of other
people, of course, and has no reference to the Sublime Truths
of the reader's own religion.

The principle function of the socio-sexual circuit, in the
higher primates, is to form an adult personality—a parent.1
By definition, the parent is one who cares for the young of
the species; by genetic necessity, the parent also cares
about the young. In symbolizing humans, this means
planning, hoping and having aspirations. In the language of
the mystics, this means being "attached" and "trapped on

the wheel of karma"; the first effort in most mystical
traditions is to break this fourth-circuit attachment by
taking a vow of celibacy.
The fourth circuit is located in the left neo-cortex—the
newest part of the left hemisphere of the brain It is linked
neurologically with the genitalia and the breasts (fuckinghugging-embracing-protecting circuitry).
Persons who take their heaviest imprint on this circuit are
beautiful. That is, their entire body has received so many
sexual neurotransmitters from the brain that they are
constantly radiating the "attractive" mating signals that
make up our perception of what is "beautiful" in a human
being.
According to accidents of imprinting, they can be coldly
calculating exploiters, totally repressed Puritans or carry
some other negative traits but they always look like (send
the signals of) the ideal fucker-lover-protector.
Once formulated, "morality" serves as not only a check on
genetic drift but a brake against Circuit III innovation. The
1 Homosexuality (like left-handedness) is probably included in
the genetic script to serve auxiliary functions. In most primitive
societies, the homosexuals (and the left-handed) are shunted
into shamanic roles. In more complex societies they are (like
spinsters and heterosexual bachelors) usually shunted into
intellectual or artistic roles, which have quasi-shamanic
functions of making, breaking or transforming cultural signals.
Those who claim any perennial sexual variation is "against
nature" are underestimating nature's variety, diversity and
economy. The "mutation" of Leonardo de Vinci, a left-handed
homosexual, was needed to break up the signal of the dying
medieval reality-tunnel and remake our perceptions into the
reality-tunnel of post-Renaissance scientific humanism. His
success is registered by the fact that a Leonardo painting is still
the "norm" of what we mean by realism, i.e., most people
(including right-handed heterosexuals) are living in the
scientific-humanist "space" this man invented.

shamans, priests etc. define which ideas are "moral" and
which are "immoral." Anything new — anything that will
break the tribal cycle, i.e., take us out of cyclical mythic
"time" into linear, progressive, revolutionary "time" — is
usually defined, very quickly, as "immoral."
To say that religion and priestcraft have played a
conservative role in history is an understatement. One
might as well say that bubonic plague has killed a few
people, or that Hitler was a little bit strange. The chief role
of religion has always been reactionary.
This is its evolutionary function, in the dialectic of the
circuitry of the brain.
Circuit III, unchecked, is like a cocaine monologue. You
can't remember anything, because everything is changing
too fast.
This is profoundly disorienting to the average domesticated
primate, so the tribal moralists keep stability and tranquility
by acting as decelerators, The average person, similarly, is
philosophically most "open" and "curious" before the adult
sex role of parenthood is elected.
After reproduction, there is little time for Circuit III
speculations, and (because of the sanctions every tribe
places upon "heresy," i.e., new ideas) there is also little
inclination.
Thus, Circuit III tends to take us out of tribal cyclical time
into linear progressive time; but Circuit IV loops us back
into the cycle again.
Homosexuals may or may not be the chief creators of
cultural innovation, as some Gay Pride advocates claim; but
it is certainly true that they have done more than their
share. The reason? They are not trapped into parent roles.
These four circuits are coded, with four permutations of
each, into the "court cards" of the Tarot deck.
Thus the Knight of Discs, representing earth/earth
according to the occultists, is the pure First-Circuit type —
all sensation, all oral demand, all viscerotonic. Behind their
alchemical, Cabalistic, theosophical jargon, most books on
Tarot are describing this type when they discuss this card.
The pure undiluted "Momma's boy."

IMPRINTING THE SOCIO-SEXUAL CIRCUIT
A and B represent socially "good" and socially "bad" sex,
according to the tribe, Al, A2 and A3 represent individual
imprints—personally "good" sex (what the individual is
imprinted to like)—and Bl, B2 and B3 personally "bad"
(what the individual doesn't like). If Axis A1-B1 is only
slightly tilted, the individual is fairly "normal" (in that
society).
If A2-B2 is tilted more; the individual is "neurotic" (in that
society). If A3-B3 is tilted much further; the individual is a
"pervert" (in that society).
The Queen of Discs, or earth/water, is a mixture of first and
second circuit traits—sensational-viscerotonic-oral and
emotional- egotistic-political. You better be damned careful
to call her Ms. The Prince of Discs, or earth/air, is a blend of
first and third circuits—oral demand and rational
calculation. Probably, a very sharp and sharkish lawyer.
The Princess of Discs, or earth/fire is first-circuit orality
mixed with fourth-circuit sexuality. This fusion of
exhibitionism with enflamed eros means she's probably
starring in porn movies. In all Disc cards, the first circuit
predominates over the others.
The Queen of Cups, or water/water, is emotion and
territorial demand. Nelson Algren had her in mind when he
said, "Never bed down with a woman who has more
problems than you."
The Knight of Cups, water/earth, is emotion plus sensation.
The pure predator, marauder, thief, rapist or sociopath.
The Prince of Cups or water/air is emotion plus reason. The
humanist, humanitarian, liberal; an ideal Unitarian minister.
The Princess of Cups is water/fire: an explosive mixture of
egotism and sexuality. Scarlett O'Hara. The femme fatale.
The Prince of Swords is air/air: all pure undiluted intellect.
His feet never touch the earth; he lives amid floating
abstractions.
The monk-scholar.
The Knight of Swords is air/earth: reason and oral
exhibitionism.
The actor, orator, demagogue—sometimes the artist.
The Queen of Swords is air/water; reason plus emotion.
The greats in science and art are generally of this imprint
group.
The Princess of Swords is air/fire: reason and sexuality. The
good parent; usually the Puritan, but sometimes the
crusader for "sexual freedom." In any case, the motivating
drive is an attempt to impose abstract reason upon the
genetic imperatives of the mating urge.
The Princess of Wands is fire/fire: sexuality at its most
powerful.
These types are usually, but not necessarily, quite
promiscuous; sometimes they pour all their erotic energy
into one mate and raise huge families, parenting being a

strong part of the fourth circuit; e.g., J.S. Bach, who may
have written the sexiest music in history, had twenty
children.
The Knight of Wands is fire/earth: sexuality and
sensationalism.
The Playboy. Reich's "Phallic Narcissist."
The Prince of Wands is fire/air: sexuality plus reason. These
types are likely to get involved in the kind of empirical
mysticism that is not tolerated by the local Authorities—
e.g., the Tantrists in India, the Knights Templar and witches
in medieval Europe, Aleister Crowley and Wilhelm Reich
most recently.
(Crowley said this card was a portrait of his "True Self.")
The Queen of Wands is fire/water: sexuality and emotional
politics. The law courts have a steady parade of this type
passing through every day.
The clever Cabalists who designed this pictorial key to the
four primitive circuits included a clue to higher
consciousness.
For they teach that each element in traditional alchemy
(earth, air, fire, water) corresponds to one of these Tarot
suits (discs, swords, wands, cups) and to one of the letters
in the Holy Unspeakable Name of God—YHVH. The
correspondences are as follows:
Y fire
wands
CIRCUIT IV
H water
cups
CIRCUIT II
V air
swords
CIRCUIT III
H earth
discs
CIRCUIT I
The logic of this imagery is quite clear to the unconscious
mind, and these associations appear frequently in dreams,
as Jung documented in Psychology and Alchemy.

CIRCUIT I
CIRCUIT II
Oral narcissist Emotionalist
sensation
feeling

CIRCUIT III CIRCUIT IV
Rationalist
Sex Role
reason
(missing in Jung)

Natural Child

Adult or
Computer

Parent

(missing in Freud)

Super-ego

ld

Adapted Child

Ego

The aim of the Cabala is to make the microcosm mirror the
macrocosm"; that is, to make the human being a perfect
image of "God." This means putting together the four
"alchemical" elements symbolized by the letters Y, H, V, H.
In other words, bringing the four circuits into balance.
This is the same lesson as taught in the Buddhist mandalas
with four demons at the corners and the circle representing
awakening in the middle.
The "married look," "the "Mom and Dad look," etc., which
are not scientific concepts but which everybody can
recognize at once, have to do with an acute time-sense.
The parent is concerned not just with acquiring bio-survival
tickets for personal nurture, but with acquiring tickets for
the young, and for the future.
Behaviorists tell us wonderful stories about the intricate
patterns that can be conditioned into experimental animals.
See they say we have, by selective reinforcement, trained
this rat so that at the sound of a bell, he runs up a ladder,
presses button A, races across a plank and down another
ladder, presses button B, dashes across the cage and waits
at the food-slot for his meal to arrive.
Lest anybody think this book is written from a perch of
superiority, consider the similar, but more complex,
behavior which the author followed for twenty years. He
would set an alarm clock before sleep every night. When
the alarm woke him, he would breakfast hurriedly, rush off
to catch a bus, ride to a subway, change to the train, ride
to an office building, rush through the lobby, board an
elevator, ride to a certain floor, enter an office, and toil at

repetitious (and generally pointless) tasks for eight hours.
This behavior sequence had been shaped, as B.F.
Skinner would say, by reinforcement delivered every
second week in the form of bio-survival tickets (money).
These tickets were necessary to the bio-survival of four
dependent children.
The reader of this book can probably remember, somewhat
dimly, the imprinting and conditioning of each of these
circuits.
We all began as infants in a one-dimensional world, orally
hooked to Mommy. The further away from Mommy we
crawled, the greater was our bio-survival anxiety, and we
generally returned to Mommy as quickly as possible. The
key imprint incidents of this period, together with
associated conditioning, determine, concretely, how much
we currently exhibit of:
ANXIETY
OR
SELF-CONFIDENCE
ROOTEDNESS
OR
EXPLORATIVENESS
DEPENDENCY
OR
INDEPENDENCE
Then, when the DNA sent the appropriate RNA messenger
molecules to the glands, endocrine system, etc. a mutation
occurred.
Our gross morphology — our whole body — changed, and
our "minds" changed in the process. That is, our realitytunnel dilated into two-dimensions, when we rose up and
began to walk about the house, and started learning who
we could dominate, who could dominate us, who could be
dominated (emotionally bullied) at some times and not at
others, etc. We developed out of amorphous bio-survival
consciousness into stubborn individual ego. We were
imprinted and conditioned with a particular style of
emotional-territorial "politics."
At this stage we were imprinted and conditioned for:
DOMINANCE
OR
SUBMISSION
SELF-CONFIDENCE
OR
SELF-DOUBT
STRONG EGO
OR
WEAK EGO
HIGH PACK STATUS
OR
LOW PACK STATUS
GIVING ORDERS
OR
TAKING ORDERS
"HERRENMORAL"
OR
"SKLAVMORAL"
We were subsequently conditioned to switch between these
reflexes depending on whether the person we were dealing
with was Higher in the pecking order or Lower in the
pecking order.
(Middle-class people, e.g., Reagan conservatives, John
Birchers, etc. will always revere those Higher in the pecking
order; and, equally, will always have some reason to
persecute—peck at— the poor, who are Lower in the
pecking order. Hence, they will say and even believe, that
they are being robbed by the poor on Welfare—who get
about 4% of the tax dollar—and never "notice" that the
military-industrial complex is getting 72% of their tax
dollar. This is normal mammalian sociobiology.)
After this second-circuit reality-tunnel is wired in, the
organism molts and mutates again into the verbal stage,
and a third circuit style of mentation imprinted. That is, on
top of protoplasmic consciousness and mammalian ego, we
acquire human mind, which is created by and creator of
human artifacts and speech.
Feral children, who survived in isolation from human society
(artifacts and speech), have .no "mind" in the human
sense; which is why they are called feral.
In the semantic stage of imprint vulnerability we acquire
either:
FLUENCY
OR
INARTICULATENESS
DEXTERITY
OR
CLUMSINESS
"GOOD MIND" OR
"DUMB MIND"1
Why do we say "dumb" (mute) for stupid? Because "a good
mind means a good mouth," and the human mind is a
verbalizing circuit.
At puberty, another DNA trigger fires and RNA messengers
initiate another morphological mutation of body-mind. The
"adult personality" is imprinted and conditioned. We
become:
"MORAL"
OR
"IMMORAL"
ROBOT-OBEDIENT
OR
ROBOT-DISOBEDIENT
SOLID CITIZEN
OR
SEXUAL OUTLAW
"PARENT"
OR
ANARCHIST
Lack of understanding of these morphological changes, and
their persistence in imprint circuits in the brain, is
responsible for most failures in communication, and for the

general sense of exasperation with which we too often
confront each other. Since everybody's imprints are a little
bit different—the average is that which nobody totally is1—
we all feel at times like the legendary Quaker who told his
wife, "All the world is mad but me and thee, and sometimes
I wonder about thee."
Reichians, disciples of Dr. Spock and the Summerhill
School, etc. have called attention, with some impatience, to
the brutality and stupidity of many of our traditional childrearing methods.
These methods are "brutal" and "stupid" only if, like the
abovementioned heretics, one regards the goal of childrearing as the production of a sane, balanced, creative
[NOT CRATED] human being. THIS HAS NEVER BEEN THE
GOAL OF ANY SOCIETY IN THE REAL WORLD. The
traditional childrearing methods are quite logical, pragmatic
and sound in fulfilling the real purpose of society, which is
not to create an ideal person, but to create [CRATE] a semirobot who mimics the society as closely as possible—both in
its rational and its irrational aspects, both as the repository
of the wisdom of the past and as the sum total of all the
cruelties and stupidities of the past. Very simply, a totally
aware, alert, awakened (unbrainwashed) person would not
fit very well into any of the standard roles society offers;
the damaged, robotized products of traditional child-rearing
do fit into those slots.
1 James Joyce justified anarchism on the grounds that "the
state is concentric and the individual is eccentric."

That is, there is a neuro-sociological "logic" to the illogical.
Are traditional schools very much like mini-prisons? Do they
stifle imagination, cramp the child physically and mentally,
and run on various forms of overt or covert terrorism? Of
course, the answer is an unambiguous yes; but such
schools are necessary to train people for roles in the
ordinary office or factory or profession, which are also very
much like mini-prisons, stifle imagination, cramp the person
physically and mentally and run on terror (threat of loss of
bio-survival tickets, in the form of pay-checks or tenure).
The permissive movement in child-rearing appeared only
when it did, and has succeeded only to a limited extent,
because society has always needed and still thinks it needs
human robots.
Utopian child-rearing will advance further, necessarily, only
as society itself evolves out of authoritarianism. That is, as
the accelerated changes now occurring propel us into the
most rapid period of social evolution in all human history,
we will then need citizens who are not robots, who are
creative; who are not docile, who are innovative; who are
not narrow-minded bigots, who are explorers in every
sense of the word.
Traditional child-rearing began to falter only when society
began to enter into the present period of accelerated
change and technological omni-transformation of all
traditional values.
Failures in communication generally derive from sending a
message to the wrong address. That is, your husband has
an ego problem and you send a message to his mind.
Adapting a diagram from Transactional Analysis what has
happened is this:
IV

IV

Parent

III

III

Adult or Computer

II

II

Adapted Child

I

I

Natural Child

The message is addressed from Circuit I to Circuit IV. It
means "I feel weak; help bolster me up." If the answer
comes back from Circuit III to Circuit III, "Well, let's
analyze the problem..." there has been a Wrong Address.
Of course, this example is deliberately untypical, although
not impossible. It is untypical because women traditionally
are trained not to make this kind of mistake—to be
"emotionally sensitive," to be "supportive," etc. It is much
more likely, statistically;, that this kind of Wrong Address
will go the other way— husband to wife. That is, the wife
signals "Help!" and the husband on Circuit III says, "Let's

analyze the problem..." We have said that the imprinting of
the circuits contains a large element of accident (within
genetic
parameters).
Society,
everywhere,
without
understanding
this
theory,
understands
enough
pragmatically about imprinting processes to attempt to
program each individual for his or her assigned role. Hence,
traditional girl-rearing is different from traditional boyrearing, so that women will have more Circuit II
"sensitivity." Again Women's Liberation, like modern childrearing, arrived only when we were evolutionarily ready or
nearly-ready for it. The traditional system worked in
traditional societies.
Similarly, class structure, like the caste structure in an
insect hive, works to produce the "right" imprints in each
class. The third circuit of the servile class or proletariat is
imprinted chiefly for manual dexterity, while the same
circuit in middle-class or ruling-class children is imprinted
for verbal, mathematical or other symbol-using skills
Democracy has been less than a total success—and the
intellectual's half-shamed cynicism about democracy is
justified—to the extent that traditional society did not need,
could not use, and in many ways discouraged the
development of high verbal ("rational") skills in the majority
of the population. That is, concretely, most people are not
encouraged to be very smart, and are rather heavily
programmed
to
be
comparatively
stupid.
Such
programming is what is needed to fit them into most
traditional jobs. Their bio-survival circuitry works as well as
that of most animals, their emotional-territorial circuitry is
typically primate, and they have little third-circuit "mind" to
verbalize (rationalize) with. Naturally, they usually vote for
the charlatan who can activate primitive bio-survival fears
and territorial ("patriotic") pugnacity. The intellectual looks
at the dismal results and continues to believe in
"democracy" only by an act of Blind Faith similar to the way
beliefs in Catholicism or Communism or snake-worship are
maintained.
Again, the traditional system works, for traditional society.
A mass made of people who have intense curiosity about
why Beethoven went in for string quartets after the Ninth
Symphony, or whether Kant really refuted Hume
satisfactorily, or what the latest quantum theories mean in
relation to Determinism and Free Will, is not a mass that
will easily be led into dull, dehumanizing labor at traditional
jobs.
Why did Adlai Stevenson lose to Ike Eisenhower, George
McGovern to Tricky Dicky Nixon, etc.? It was the Wrong
Address problem again. Stevenson, McGovern and other
darlings of the intelligentsia were speaking to the third
circuit, which is not very highly developed in most
domesticated primates yet.
Eisenhower in his Fatherly way, and Nixon in his bullying
Big Brother way, knew just how to push the right SecondCircuit emotional-territorial buttons to get a mob of
primates to follow them. They were genetically
programmed alpha males, in ethological terms.
Similarly, the Moralist (i.e., the Adult Personality who has
imprinted heavy Ethical imperatives on Circuit IV) is often
totally unable to communicate with the scientist or
technologist. The Moralist may even decide—many already
have—that the scientist per se is "inhuman." In fact, morals
are fairly irrelevant to the Third Circuit analytical mind,
which is the brain function the average scientist has
imprinted most powerfully. To the third circuit, the only
morality is accuracy, the only immorality is sloppy thinking.
Again, the rise in "social conscience" among scientists is
happening only when it was evolutionarily necessary that it
happen, i.e., after Hiroshima. If it doesn't seem to be
happening widely enough and quickly enough, well, the
same can be said—also in error, I think—about modernizing
education and childrearing, about Women's Liberation,
about racism, etc. The rebellion against all the follies of the
past is succeeding, and will continue to succeed, only as we
evolve into a society which needs each human to function
well on all circuits. We are moving with ever increasing
speed, into such a society.
What the impatient radical forgets is that many of the
"injustices" of the traditional primate society were not even
perceived as such by the best minds of 1000 years ago or
100 years ago, or in the case of institutionalized sexism,

even 30 years ago. If we can see injustice and absurdity in
many age-old institutions, it is only because we are
evolving out of robothood, at precisely the point in
evolution when it is necessary for us to become smarter
and more sensitive on all circuits.
Each of us has a "favorite" circuit—that is, a circuit that has
been
more
heavily
imprinted
than
the
others.
Miscommunication,
misunderstanding
and
general
misjudgment of one another is vastly increased by the fact
that few of us know about these levels of circuitry, and we
all tend to assume that the person we are interacting with
is on the same circuit we are.
Thus, there are narcissistic (oral) first-circuit types in every
social group. Present them with a problem and they will
immediately look for somebody else to handle it, since the
oral stage is robotically imprinted for dependency. (Or, if
they have imprinted hostile weakness instead of dependent
weakness, they will explode into anger—infantile tantrum—
raging that a problem exists and that it has been imposed
on them.)
A second-circuit type, in the same situation, will attempt to
frighten the problem away by barking and blustering at it,
mammalian-fashion.
A third-circuit type will try to reason out the problem. This
is the best approach only with problems that are
themselves rational, i.e., "How do you make this machine
work?" It can be blind, and futile, when the "problem" is
another human being acting out one of the more
destructive second-circuit rage programs.
("The liberal is the one who leaves the room when the fight
starts," somebody once said. Third-circuit types are most
confused and feel impotent when second-circuit mammalian
politics takes over the scene.)
A fourth-circuit type will try to be rational (third circuit) and
to sense the emotional dimensions of the problem (second
circuit) but will basically try to impose a moral solution:
"Now this is the decent, fair thing to do..." This may or may
not make sense to the third-circuit Rationalist, looking for
objective justice; and it will usually make no sense at all to
the totally second-circuit type dominated by emotionalism
and territoriality.
What is true of the group is true of the individual. While we
all have our favorite circuit, and tend to see that circuit as
"superior" to all the others, we can be pushed out of it by
shocks or stresses, in which case we jump to another
circuit.
The most robotic Rationalist will descend to the first circuit,
eventually, if threat to bio-security is forcibly enough
presented on the screen of consciousness. And, if prevented
from "leaving the room when the fight starts," the
Rationalist will even descend to second-circuit mammalian
howling and barking, under sufficient pressure. (Oliver
Wendell Holmes referred to this as "the hydrostatic principle
in controversy," whereby the fools drag everybody down to
their own level.)
The most robotic Emotionalist may also move up to the
third circuit, temporarily, if a problem remains intractable to
every form of emotional bullying or con-artistry.
All of us will move into fourth-circuit Parent role or Super
Ego—even little children will do it, imitatively—if it seems
that the only way to get what one wants is to appeal to
tribal morality:
"Why, it would be positively, indecent not to do it the way
Grandfather would..."
"Give us the child until he is five, and we will have him for
life," bragged some 18th Century Jesuit. The Jesuit order of
that time, as Aldous Huxley later noted sardonically,
educated Voltaire, Diderot, and the Marquis de Sade;
obviously their techniques of brain-programming were not
perfect. Nonetheless, most people in most societies do grow
up as fairly accurate replicas of the previous generation.
Most children educated by the Jesuits have remained
Catholics. Most children of Democrats do not become
Republicans. Etc.
Considering the wide variety of philosophies available to
any of us—nudism and Buddhism, scientific materialism and
snake worship, Communism and vegetarianism, subjective
Idealism and Existentialism, Methodism and Shinto, etc.—
the fact that most people remain in the same reality-tunnel
as their parents, does indicate that acculturalization is a

mind control process. We are all giants, raised by pygmies,
who have learned to walk with a perpetual mental crouch.
Unleashing our full stature—our total brain power—is what
this book is all about.
There is a Zen story (very funny—ha-ha) about a monk
who, having failed to achieve "enlightenment" (brainchange) through the normal Zen methods, was told by his
teacher to think of nothing but an ox. Day after day after
day, the monk thought of the ox, visualized the ox,
meditated on the ox. Finally, one day, the teacher came to
the monk's cell and said, "Come out here—I want to talk to
you."
"I can't get out," the monk said. "My horns won't fit through
the door."
/ can't get out...
At these words, the monk was "enlightened." Never mind
what "enlightenment" means, right now. The monk went
through some species of brain change, obviously. He had
developed the delusion that he was an ox, and awakening
from that hypnoidal state he saw through the mechanism of
all other delusions and how they robotize us.
EXERCISES
1. Recreate vividly in imagination your first orgasm. To
what extent do you still use the same accessories (stimuli)
to turn you on?
2. Try to change your sexual imprint. See if you can reach
orgasm by some method that has been taboo or
unthinkable to you before.
3. Imagine that you are Rev. Jerry Falwell. Explain to an
imaginary homosexual why his sexual imprint is "sinful" and
should be changed at once. Include instructions on how to
change it.
4. Imagine that you are a Gay man or Lesbian. Explain to
Rev. Falwell why you will not or can not change your sexual
imprint to please him.
5. Read Margaret Mead's Sex and Temperament in Three
Primitive Societies. Then write a five-page proof that the
taboos in our tribe make more sense objectively than the
taboos of the tribes she studied. Be serious about it!
6. Choose the viewpoint of the Samoans in Dr. Mead's book
above. Write a five-page proof that their taboos make more
sense than those of our society. Be serious about it.
7. Re-read the paragraphs about the giraffe and the
gosling.
What does this tell you about your sexual imprint? What is
your jeep or your ping-pong ball?

CHAPTER NINE
MINDWASHING & BRAIN PROGRAMMING
We have certain preconceived notions about location in
space which have come down to us from ape-like ancestors.
— Sir Arthur Eddington, Space, Time and Gravitation

The greatest Utopian possibility before us is also the
greatest dystopian terror.

We are learning more and more about the pragmatics of
brain change: how to alter anybody's brain so as to set
them in a totally new "reality." Visions of 1984 and Brave
New World lurk in this very concept.
But we are also learning how to change our own brains—
learning to use them for fun and profit rather than for
misery and robothood. Visions of Super-Humanity are
implicit in any perception of what this means.
The brain can be tuned, like a TV, to turn off any channel,
and to bring in a new channel. This is what the veterans of
the 1960s- 1970s Neurological Revolution know. This is the
major threat, and the major promise of our time.
Consider the alternatives.
CYANIDE AND SYNCHRONICITY
In November 1978, I was in Seattle to see the 10-hour play
which Ken Campbell had made out of the three Illuminatus!
novels by Bob Shea and myself. In the course of the drama
came a scene Shea and I had almost forgotten writing in
the seven years since the books were finished in 1971. The
scene concerned a lunatic messiah who orders 3300 of his
robot disciples to commit suicide by drinking cyanide. The
mindless automatons obey and each drinks his cyanide
cocktail.
Shea and I had written that bizarre sequence to illustrate
the extremes to which brainwashing can go. We both
regarded it as an extravagant fantasy, for satirical
purposes—an exaggeration of our serious theme.
Yet while the actors on the stage were depicting this
"fantasy" every TV and newspaper in the land was
discussing the exact same species of mass zombie
behavior. Our fictional maniac guru was Adolph Hitler; in
November 1978, while our play was being performed,
another maniac-guru, Jim Jones, had played the whole
sequence out in reality. In Guyana, he had ordered 900 of
his robots to drink cyanide and they had all obeyed.
It was particularly interesting to me that Jones had staged
his Gotterdammerung while our play was having its
American premiere. It was even more interesting that the
tool of mass suicide, in our fiction and in Jones' reality, had
been cyanide.
Carl Jung, the psychologist, and Wolfgang Pauli, the
physicist, had a name for peculiar coincidences of that
order of eeriness.
They called them synchronicities and said they represented
an acausal and/or holistic principle in nature that acts
outside the linear past-present-future of Newtonian time.
Pauli, like most quantum physicists, was aware that
subatomic events cannot be understood in Newtonian terms
and must require some sort of acausality (indeterminism)
or holism (superdeterminism) to explain them. In either
case, the distinction between "observer" and "observed"
breaks down. (About that, more later.)
Jung, in turn, had observed that such synchronicities—
weird coincidences—tend to occur when certain deep
structures in the psyche are activated. He assumed that
these structures were at what he called "the psychoid
level," below the collective unconscious, where mind and
matter are not yet distinct—the quantum foam out of which
matter and form and consciousness hierarchically emerge.
Wait. It gets weirder..; »
HEIRESS TO BANK ROBBER
When Patty Hearst was kidnapped by the Symbionese
Liberation Army on February 4, 1974, she was a "normal"
young heiress. She was attending a normal college, had a
normal live-in boyfriend and smoked a normal amount of
weed for a young heiress of that time. 57 days later, she
had become a new person, with a new name—Tania—and
was living in a new realitytunnel.
Where Patty had been heterosexual, Tania was bisexual.
Where Patty largely accepted the Hearst family tunnelreality with only a few "liberal" modifications typical of her
age group, Tania was a violent and fanatic revolutionary.
Where Patty had been respectful to her parents, Tania
denounced them as "corporate liars" and castigated them
as being involved in a capitalist plot to "murder" the poor
people of the U.S. "down to the last man, woman and
child." Where Patty had been "nice" and polite and certainly
non-violent, Tania had her photo taken holding a tommygun and assisted in at least one bank robbery and perhaps
other felonies.

What had happened? When Patty-Tania was captured and
brought to trial, the defense claimed that she had been
"brainwashed." The jury either did not understand or did
not believe this; they sentenced Patty to prison for the
crimes Tania had committed. Debate about this case
continues to the present, since some people think Ms.
Hearst was "responsible" for the consciousness change she
underwent while held captive by the SLA and others are
just as sure she was not "responsible."
Leaving metaphysical questions of "responsibility" aside for
a moment, it seems obvious that a young lady of Hearst's
class and background would almost certainly not have
taken up bank robbing if she had not first been kidnapped
and incorporated by the SLA.
Since the SLA called itself an army, let us compare it to an
army; this may prove illuminating.
One does not get kidnapped into an army the way Hearst
got kidnapped into the SLA, but the process is not entirely
dissimilar.
U.S. Army recruiters do not break into a young man's house
in the middle of night with guns, as the SLA did with Patty:
they simply send the young man a notice in the mail.
Nonetheless coercion is there; the young draftee knows
that if he ignores the letter, government agents will be
around to seize his body in a short while, (unless he flees
the country.) He will then either go into the army or into
jail. Thus, whether we are speaking about the S.L. Army or
the U.S. Army, the subject is reduced to infantile
helplessness: other people are deciding what is to be done
to his or her body. One is pushed to the neonate position of
being one foot high in a six foot tall world, as it were. Like
the small child, one is learning that the first rule of survival
is to obey.
Most people (except nudists) are shy about appearing
naked in public—and this is the most common of all
nightmares, "There I was with no clothes on!" (Joyce made
this the central incident in the dream that is all dreams,
Finnegans Wake.) The first step in leaving the civilian
reality-tunnel and being initiated into the Army realitytunnel is, thus, the physical examination, in which the
subject is stripped naked and made to march around a
large building with other naked victims while the fullyclothed Army personnel give the briefest possible orders:
"Stand up. Sit down. Go there. Come back here," etc. The
Masonic initiation, which only removes part of the clothing
of the subject, is a milder version of the stripping away of
previously secure social parameters.
What is really being "stripped away" is more subtle; it is the
whole social system in which one has lived before being
snatched by a U.S. or an S.L. Army. When the doctor tells
the naked draftee, "Bend over. Spread your cheeks," socalled normal reality has ended as totally as if the victim
had been incorporated into a surrealist movie. If an
employer becomes too obnoxious, one can always find a
new job. You cannot walk out on the U.S. or S.L. Army that
way, because acute first-circuit helplessness is being
imprinted.
When the Russian mathematician, Ouspensky, was first
studying with Gurdjieff, he had great trouble understanding
Gurdjieff s insistence that most people are machines and
totally unaware of the objective world around them. Then,
one day, after World War I had begun, Ouspensky saw a
truck full of artificial legs. These artificial legs were being
sent to the frontline hospitals, for soldiers whose legs had
not even been blown off yet, but whose legs would be
blown off. The prediction that these legs would be blown off
was so certain that the artificial legs were already on their
way to replace the natural legs. The prediction was based
on the mathematical certainty that millions of young men
would march to the front, to be maimed and murdered, as
mindlessly as cattle marching into a slaughterhouse.
In a flash, Ouspensky understood the mechanical nature of
ordinary human consciousness.
( "I can 't get out — my horns won 'tfit through the door. ")
Initiation into the "Manson family" is not dissimilar. Lynette
Fromme was much like Patty Hearst — a "normal" American
young woman, with less money than Hearst, but no special
proclivity for criminal behavior. After passing through
General Manson' s basic training, Lynette had become

Squeaky Fromme and was convicted for pointing a gun at
the U.S. President with seeming intent to assassinate him.
In the next chapter we will explain further how being
captured ("drafted") by an army is the model of all
brainwashing experience.
Human society as a whole is a vast brainwashing machine
whose semantic rules and sex roles create a social robot.
The concept of "washing" is, of course, unscientific and
crude. The brain is not a dirty garment but an electrocolloidal information processor—a living network of over
110
billion
nerve
cells capable
of
(102733000)
interconnections, a number higher than the total of all the
atoms in the universe. In this elegant, micro-miniaturized
biocomputer more than 100,000,000 processes are
programmed every minute.
From the viewpoint of neuro-sociology, how I perceive
"myself and "my world" depends on how each circuit has
been wired in my brain. Society has always known how to
wire children; the process is called acculturalization; it
explains why children of Catholics tend to become
Catholics, children of Samoans fit into Samoan society,
children of Communists become good little Communists,
etc. Each generation "brainwashes" the next.
Christianity, Buddhism and Islam, between them, are the
most potent brain-programming institutions on this planet.
Approximately half the art and philosophy of the human
race—the architecture, the music, the paintings, the
literature, the educational ideals, the "great ideas"—has
been influenced by and/or nurtured by these three great
systems of theology. This is not to denigrate the
contributions of Confucianism, Judaism, Hinduism, modern
science, etc., but merely to emphasize the extent to which
the higher civilizations have been shaped by the four
creators
of
these
three
omni-religions:
Buddha,
Mohammed, Jesus and St. Paul. What did these four men
have in common?
As Aleister Crowley points out, "No point of doctrine, no
point of ethics, no theory of a 'hereafter' do they share, and
yet in the history of their lives we find one identity amid
many diversities."
Buddha was an ordinary Hindu nobleman, and then he
experienced a rapid brain-change, after which he became a
great Teacher.
Mohammed was a humble camel-driver, with no sign of
exceptional intelligence or ambition, and then he
experienced a rapid brain change, after which he became
Teacher, Conqueror, Law-Maker and Prophet.
We hear nothing of Jesus (save a few fables) until the age
of 30, when he experiences a rapid brain-change, and puts
forth a doctrine that is to overturn the Roman Empire and
influence Western Civilization until the present.
St. Paul, who took the teaching of Jesus and turned it into a
militant movement, suffered an extreme form of brainchange, of which he tells us that he was temporarily struck
blind and lifted up into the heavens where he beheld things
"of which it is not lawful to speak."
On all else but the experience of Illumination they disagree.
Buddha insisted that his enlightenment was perfectly
natural— "Are you a God?" he was once asked.
"No."
"Are you a saint?"
"No."
"Then what are you?"
"I am awake."
Mohammed informs us that he "spoke" to the Angel Gabriel,
Jesus that the "Father which is in heaven" spoke through
him, and St. Paul that he saw the lights and wonders above
mentioned.
Making every possible reservation about fable and myth, we
get this one coincidence: A nobody experiences rapid
brainchange (consciousness dilation) and abruptly becomes
very much a historical Somebody. Much of the human race
is still living on the legacy of these four bio-electrical
"illuminations," for good and for ill.
Most people (the present author included) would consider
what happened to Patty Hearst "bad" and what happened to
Buddha "good." It needs to be emphasized that both the
"bad" and the "good" brain change experiences are
functionally the same. The process is modeled, on a small
scale by any design such as the following:

If you have seen this only one way, look at it again. There
are two opposite ways of seeing it.
When your whole world, not just a design on a book-page,
is transformed this way, you are experiencing the kind of
brainchange that can turn a rich heiress into a bank robber,
an obscure carpenter into a Messiah, or an ordinary bank
teller into a mental patient...
Similar forms of major brain-change underlie all
revolutionary breakthroughs in the arts, and in science as
well. Neurosociology is a history of massive brain changes,
as we quantumjumped from "tribal" reality to "feudal"
reality, from "feudal" reality to "industrial" reality, and now
are jumping to Future Reality.
Consider the revolution against death, if you think you
haven't been brainwashed.
Not all people have accepted mortality. Mystics, of course,
have always insisted there is a species of "spiritual"
immortality, but aside from that, Taoists in China and
alchemists in Europe spent hundreds of years seeking the
elixir of life that would allow for physical immortality.
Paracelsus, for instance, left behind some of his sperm with
directions to a student on how to revive or recreate him out
of it. (He seems to have had a crude and inaccurate idea of
cloning.) In the 1780s, both Benjamin Franklin and
Condorcet, in America and France, wrote that medical
science would eventually conquer death along with every
other disease.
The modern immortalist movement began with physicist
R.C.W. Ettinger who published The Prospect of Immortality
in 1964. Ettinger, who had entered a reality-tunnel different
from the imprinted consensus-reality of our tribe, said
bluntly that we could be the generation that abolished
death and we should start working for that goal.
Since then, research on life-extension and longevity has
quantum jumped rapidly. Numerous books have come forth
carrying the same basic message as Ettinger's. Among
them have been:
The Biological Time Bomb, Taylor, 1968
The Immortalist, Harrington, 1969
The Immortality Factor, Segerberg, 1973
Here Comes Immortality, Tucille, 1974
Prolongevity, Rosenfeld, 1976
No More Dying, Kurtzman, 1978
The Life Extension Revolution, Kent, 1980
Dozens of societies have been founded for anti-aging
research, to lobby for more research, or just to publicize
the possibility before us—the enormous evolutionary jump
from mortality to immortality. Among these groups are:
Committee for the Elimination of Death, San Marcos, CA.;
Bay Area Cryonics Society, San Francisco, CA; Prometheus
Society, Baltimore, MD.; Long Life, Chicago, IL.; Alcor
Foundation, San Diego, CA; Foundation for Research
Against Disease and Death, New York, NY, etc. Now
consider the cover of a recent book on this topic: Conquest
of Death Alvin Silverstein, Ph.D. The front jacket says, in
bold type but timid words:
A Controversial Look at the Revolution in Medicine
and Why We May Be the Last Generation to Die
Note the pessimistic implications: immortality is coming,
but not for me and you. We are still condemned to death.
Our horns won't fit through the door.
This fatalistic version of Dr. Silverstein's message must
have seemed necessary to the publishers because they felt
that saying we don't have to die would be too shocking to
the ordinary reader. What? You and I live forever?
Nonsense! Our realitytunnels have all been imprinted to end
with the dying of the light.

Inside the jacket, a more accurate version of what Dr.
Silverstein is saying appears:
We Need Not Be the Last Generation to Die— We Can
Conquer Death in Our Time
Evidently, putting this on the front of the book would have
been too much of a "Neurological Revolution" for the
average reader—at least in the publisher's estimation.
One has to reach page 189 of the book to find Dr.
Silverstein's own estimate of the probable chronology of
immortality, which is:
GOOD NEWS FOLKS
c. 1983 We begin to halt the aging process
c. 1989 Life span prolonged indefinitely
c. 1999 Conquest of disease and death
Well, he was over-optimistic: but we've definitely reached
the first step (1997).
Who told you that you had to die? Were they any more
infallible than the people who programmed Patty Hearst,
etc.?
"But—but—the Immortalists are only a minority..." (So
were the Einsteinians in 1910.)
"But—but—Reverend Jones told me to drink the cyanide
and he knows what's right..."
"But—but my horns won't fit through the door...
EXERCISES
1. Imagine yourself into the reality-tunnel of the far-right
group known as the John Birch Society. Believe for a while
that the U.S. government is 85% under covert United
Nations (UN) control and an open UN dictatorship will be
declared soon. Turn on the TV in that frame of mind and
look for all the evidence that each newscaster is either a
conscious or an unconscious dupe of the UN conspiracy.
2. Imagine yourself into the Head Space of a dogmatic
Rationalist.
Analyze the Jim Jones-cyanide-Illuminatus synchronicity as
"mere coincidence."
3. Imagine yourself into the Head Space of an occultist.
Analyze the Jim-Jones-cyanide-///Mmmam.y synchronicity
as an Omen. What does it mean? Jungians say
synchronicities contain "messages" from the deep structure
of the collective mind. What is the message ?
4. Enter the Immortalist head-space for a few minutes.
Imagine you invest only $1000 at normal bank interest,
compounded annually. What will you have in 100 years? In
200 years?
(Nobody has used this conservative path to investment and
gotten rich on it before because nobody has lived long
enough.)
5. Why are you not a nudist (if you aren't)? Make up five
good reasons, then go find a nudist and explain them to her
(or him).
6. Become a Nazi for thirty three minutes. Believe that all
politics is a matter of strength, stealth and treachery: that
all liberalism is hypocrisy or folly. Plan a campaign to take
over the world by force and fraud.
7. Go to a Fundamentalist revival meeting where faithhealings are performed. Or watch Jerry Falwell on TV.
Remember all the time that lim lones started out with that
routine. See if you can get into the head space of the
Believers and decide whether or not they would drink
cyanide if their HOLY MAN told them to.

CHAPTER TEN
HOW TO BRAIN-WASH FRIENDS & ROBOTIZE PEOPLE
There is no government, no industrial-military complex, no
economic system, no mass media that can ever reduce us
to puppets and robots as thoroughly as the biological and
environmental dictatorships have.
— P.M. Esfandiary, Upwingers

As noted earlier, when the bio-survival circuit flashes
danger, all other mental activity ceases.
There is no "time" on the bio-survival circuit; reflexes act
without emotional ego, rational mind or adult personality
participating: "I just found myself doing it."
All the martial arts—judo, akido, kung fu, etc.—are
reimprinting techniques for the bio-survival circuit. They are
intended to ensure that what happens mechanically
("without thought") really does serve bio-survival, since the
reflexes imprinted accidentally on this circuit are not that
dependable.
The mechanical nature of the bio-survival circuit is of key
importance in brainwashing. To create a new imprint,
reduce the victim to an infantile state, i.e., first-circuit
vulnerability.
As pointed out in the last chapter an army begins this
process with the draft notice, which informs the subject that
his body no longer belongs to him but to the government.
The S.L. Army, seeking quicker brain change, began the
conversion of Patty into Tania by taking her at gun point,
but the message was the same:
"We can do what we want with your body from now on."
Firstcircuit bio-survival instincts thus become hooked to
obeying those who have this awesome power—just as the
infant learns to hook its bio-survival circuitry to the parental
figures.
Patty's ride in the trunk of a car (after being taken at
gunpoint) is a classic rebirth ritual; the trunk is even womblike in its contours. When the trunk opened, she was reborn
into a new reality-tunnel, that of her captors. Similarly,
where the earliest forms of masonic initiation survive and

have not been diluted (Note the Adeptus Major Ritual in the
Complete Golden Dawn System of Magic, by Israel
Regardie, Falcon Press 1983.) the candidate is thrown into
a well, and then "raised" as a newborn Freemason. Total
submersion, the form of baptism preferred by Protestant
fundamentalists, imitates this, but without the real anxiety
that made traditional masonry and the SLA so effective as
brain change agents.
All brainwashers empirically know (without in most cases
ever having read Leary's eight-circuit model of the brain)
that the oral bio-survival circuit seeks bonding with a
mothering figure.
To increase panic and imprint vulnerability, then, the
subject, after being seized by the brainwashers (U.S. or
S.L. Army, "secret police," or whoever they may be in a
given case) is isolated from all those to whom bonding had
previously been established. The draftee is sent to boot
camp and sees no loved ones (wife, girlfriend, parents,
etc.) for a number of weeks or months. The political
prisoner is thrown into a dungeon. Patty Hearst was locked
in a closet as soon as she was "rebirthed" out of the trunk
of the car.
Experiments in isolation by the U.S. Marine Corps, Dr. John
Lilly and others—and the records of shipwrecked sailors, as
summarized by Lilly in Simulations of God—show that only
a few hours of pure isolation may be necessary before
hallucinations begin. These hallucinations, like those of
psychedelic drugs, indicate the breaking down of previous
imprints and the onset of vulnerability to new imprints.
The need to bond the bio-survival circuit to somebody (or
some thing) is indicated by the giraffe who imprinted on the
hunter's jeep as a mother-substitute. Similarly, children
without siblings, especially those in remote rural areas,
often invent imaginary playmates, which can become "real"
enough to frighten the parents into suspecting the onset of
psychosis. Dr. Lilly's records of sailors and explorers in
isolation show that such "guides," "companions" or "holy
guardian angels" reappear quickly even in adulthood when
normal social contact is removed. They also come promptly
to those undergoing the mysterious state called "neardeath" or "out of body experience," (e.g., when the heart
stops on the operating table.)
The first human being who appears to the subject after this
isolation can easily become bonded as the mothersubstitute, or, next best, as a father-substitute. This
explains why people held prisoner by terrorists (e.g., on
hijacked airplanes) often develop a "paradoxical" sympathy
for those who are threatening to kill them. It also explains
why the draftee begins to look on his kidnappers as
protectors as well as captors, and why the brainwash victim
begins to please, gratify and eventually "respect" the
brainwasher.
In all cases, since the bio-survival circuit is keyed to
nourishment, those who bring food become possible
subjects for bonding.
The political prisoner, the draftee, the subject kidnapped by
terrorists,
all
move
somewhat
closer
to
identification/bonding with their captors as they are fed
regularly. Again, this is imitated crudely by various religions
(without the terror that creates true imprint vulnerability)
by following baptism/rebirth rituals with a communal meal
or Holy Eucharist.
Adaptations of these principles can be applied even to those
who walk into the brainwashing environment voluntarily at
first, as in People's Temple, the Manson Family, and similar
organizations.
The first step, once the victim is inside the territory
(commune), is to begin isolation by cutting off all
communication with the outer world and its conflicting
reality-tunnels.
Meanwhile, a parental-protective atmosphere is quickly
created (sometimes called "love-bombing") and food is
provided.
Whether the subject has entered voluntarily as in these
communes, or has been kidnapped or arrested (as in police
states), the next stage is to break down the second-circuit
emotionalterritorial imprints. That means that the subject
continues to be fed (maintaining first-circuit oral
dependence) while the secondcircuit ego is attacked in
every manner possible. A point-bypoint comparison of the

techniques of a Synanon "gamer" and U.S. Army drill
sergeant, for instance, would show astonishing similarities,
since the basic message is dozens and dozens of variations
on "You are all wrong. We are all right. It is extremely
unlikely that somebody as wrong as you will become right,
ever, but we will try to teach you." The anal vocabulary of
territorial status is, of course, employed extensively. The
ideal subject may almost forget his or her name and
become conditioned to answering to "You asshole, come
here."
The sense of bottom dog helplessness can be escalated by
periodic doses of real terror. One of Charlie Manson's
famous sayings was "Fear is the great teacher," and every
brainwasher would agree ardently. In communist countries
(as dramatized in Costa-Gravas's fine and factual film, The
Confession) a favorite trick is to take the subject out of his
cell, march him to a courtyard, place a noose about his
neck, and convince him he is about to be hanged. The
relief, when this turns out to be a bluff, creates ideal
imprint vulnerability. A variation in my novel Illuminatus!
has the victim persuaded he has been poisoned, dumped in
a coffin and the lid slammed upon him. Those who have
been initiated as Mark Master Freemasons will recognize at
once that the same technique is the "mark that you will
carry to your grave."
Among the Zuni Indians, the male at adolescence is
kidnapped by masked "demons" who carry him away from
the tribe (away from mother and other imprinted security
figures.) He is dragged out into the desert and threatened
with whips. Then the masks come off, revealing his
maternal uncles, and in that moment of imprint
vulnerability the tribal "secrets" (the local reality-tunnel)
are explained in a way that leave an indelible mark on his
consciousness. Similar rites of passage are found in all
tribes, few as cleverly designed as this one. Symbolic and
diluted versions survive in Bar Mitzvahs and Confirmation
ceremonies in our local mega-tribes.
The rebirthing of the second circuit is (relatively) complete
when the Bottom Dog subject begins to seek, sincerely (not
hypocritically) to win the approval of the Top Dogs. This, of
course, only begins as play-acting; the skilled brainwasher
knows that, and does not really object. With subtle
reinforcement the play-acting becomes more and more
genuine. Edmund Burke noted long ago, and every Method
Actor knows, that you cannot make three dramatic gestures
of rage in a political speech, without beginning to feel some
real rage. You cannot make three gestures of submission
without beginning to feel really submissive.
(This is the psychology of the "company man," who truly
identifies with his employer after years of obedience.)
The draftee first tries to please the sergeant, to avoid
further humiliation and punishment. Gradually, he
genuinely wants to please the sergeant, i.e., to prove he is
not all wrong and is "good enough" to be a soldier. Patty
Hearst undoubtedly pretended to accept the SLA realitytunnel at first, and gradually found the presence becoming
more and more real.
This process is accelerated by a system of occasional
rewards, as the subject more and more often emits (as the
Behaviorists would say) the desired behaviors. Since people
are more complicated than Behaviorists know, it is
necessary to vary this with occasional punishments for
"insincerity," or "backsliding," so that the subject learns
that after the initial stage, it is not enough to pretend to
accept the new reality-tunnel; to escape further
humiliation, ego-loss, terrorism and permanent Bottom Dog
status, one must begin to accept it sincere/y. After the
imprint of helplessness had been made, this conditioning
and learning will proceed fairly smoothly, especially if the
Chief Brainwasher's confederates reinforce it with
encouragement, support, and general "reward" (for sincere
submission) and contempt, disappointment and general
rejection (for insincerity or backsliding.)
Reimprinting the third semantic circuit can now follow
easily.
The human brain is capable of mastering any symbolsystem if sufficiently motivated. Some people can even play
Beethoven's late piano music, although to me this is as
"miraculous" as any feat alleged by psychic researchers;
people can learn French, Hindustani, differential calculus,

Swahili, etc. ad. infinitum—if motivated. When the first
circuit security needs have been reimprinted and secondcircuit ego-needs have been hooked to mastering a new
semantic reality-tunnel, that tunnel will be imprinted.
At this point a certain amount of arbitrary nonsense is of
great value. That is, the new reality-tunnel or symbolsystem (like the old one) should contain pitfalls (gross
violations of previous reality tunnels and common sense) so
that the subject can be accused of backsliding (being "all
wrong," after all) and thereby incited to try harder to
become part of the new reality-tunnel.
Thus, Jehovah's Witnesses may not accept blood
transfusions, even if their life depends on it: harder still
(since all mammals have an instinct to protect their young)
they must reject blood transfusions for their children, even
if the children die of this neglect. A Roman Catholic woman
may not be divorced even if her husband comes home
drunk every night, beats her up and gives her VD. In the
U.S. Marines, a recruit who commits the hideous crime of
calling a rifle a "gun" must walk around the base with his
rifle in one hand and his penis in the other reciting to
everybody he meets, "This is my rifle/This is my gun/This is
for fighting/This is for fun." Theosophists were once
required to believe that there is a hole at the North Pole
going down to the center of the earth; Manson required his
followers to believe the hole was in the Mojave Desert. Nazi
Party members were asked to believe that the lion is an
Aryan animal and the rabbit non- Aryan. Etc.
The neurological and sociological function of such
"nonsense" (which makes the Rationalist gasp in shock) is
to sharply segregate those within the new reality-tunnel
from those outside. This makes for group solidarity, groupreinforcement, and a strong sense of alienation and
discomfort when on rare occasions it is necessary to talk at
all with those outside the brainwasher's semantic system.
The group must ensure, of course, that this alienation is
experienced as "superiority." Those who are outside the
reality-tunnel must be perceived as "all wrong"—just as the
subject was, before being brainwashed.
Drugs can be, and have been, used to fine-tune these
processes, but the general neurological principles are
powerful enough that it is quite likely that many famous
cases of brainwashing were accomplished as above
described, without any drugs at all—e.g., the American
soldiers who confessed to war crimes which they evidently
had not committed, the loyal Communists who confessed to
Trotskyite conspiracies which seemingly never existed, etc.
It takes very few weeks for most armies, without drugs, to
convert a civilian into a soldier, even though the two
species are as different as Roman Catholics and Shintoists.
In one of my Immortal Novels I describe a religious cult
called Loonies, founded by one Neon Bal Loon, in which
members pray in pig-Latin while standing on one leg like
storks. This is considered satire, but any would-be messiah
who understands the above principles could create such a
cult easily; and the members would soon have a quite
sincere sense of superiority to those outside that realitytunnel.
Cults and outlaw terrorists generally follow the above
procedures by further rewiring of the fourth, socio-sexual
circuit.
(Governments usually leave that circuit alone, since
government agents are largely puritanical-authoritarian and
afraid to get involved at all with raw Eros.) It is no secret
that the most powerful secret society of the middle ages,
the Knights Templar, forced recruits to participate in both
blasphemy and sodomy. Just as the deliberate nonsense of
all cultish third-circuit semantics isolates the group from the
rest of society, this initiation separated the Templars from
the rest of Christendom; the alienation could easily be
conditioned into a sense of superiority. The Mau- Maus in
Kenya also insisted on one act of homosexuality to break
the
new
member's
previous
conditioning
toward
heterosexuality and monogamy. Other cults, some quite
well known, attempt to repress sexuality entirely—another
way of breaking the statistically normal imprinting of the
fourth circuit.
The Manson Family insisted on what might be called,
oxymoronically, compulsory free love. The Army serves
normal amative bonds and casts the subject into a world

where compulsory celibacy alternates with whore-house
adventures and, quite often, the rape of enemy women,
with homosexuality as an everpresent hidden option. A
current American guru, Da Free John, imprints his subjects
for lifelong monogamy, almost like the outside U.S. culture,
but is indifferent as to whether these pairings are
heterosexual or homosexual. Whatever variation the cultleader may choose, what makes for successful "separate
reality" is that it be in some respect outlandishly different
from that of the major society.
The easiest way to get brainwashed is to be born. All of the
above principles then immediately go into action, a process
which social psychologists euphemistically call socialization.
The bio-survival circuit automatically hooks onto or bonds
to the most appropriate mother or mothering object; the
emotionalterritorial circuit looks for a "role" or egoidentification in the family or tribe; the semantic circuit
learns to imitate and then use the local reality-grids
(symbol systems); the socio-sexual circuit is imprinted by
whatever mating experiences are initially available at
puberty.
The subjects may not come out of this process ready to
murder women and children, like the graduate of boot
camp, or even willing to believe that Charlie Manson was
both Jesus and Satan simultaneously, or willing to spout
New Left slogans while robbing banks. The subjects come
out of normal "socialization" depending on where and when
they
were
born
as
Eskimo
totemists,
Moslem
fundamentalists, Roman Catholics, Marxist Leninists, Nazis,
Methodist Republicans, Oxford-educatedagnostics, snake
worshippers, Ku Kluxers, Mafiosos, Unitarians, IRA-ists,
PLO-ists, orthodox Jews, hardshell Baptists, etc. etc.
The universe or existence, is obviously large enough and
complex enough and the ego self-centered enough, that all
of these reality-tunnels are capable of "making sense," to
some degree, to those imprinted/conditioned to accept
them. It is also obvious that most of these reality-tunnels
contain elements so absurd that everybody not
imprinted/conditioned by them looks at them with
astonishment and dismay, wondering "How can a rational
person (or peoples) believe such rubbish?"

What the Thinker thinks, the Prover proves... whether you
are living in a Christian reality-tunnel, a Mansonoid realitytunnel, an Immortalist reality-tunnel, a vegetarian realitytunnel, a Rationalist reality-tunnel...
Everybody has the only true true religion.
Earlier, we quoted some words from Persinger and
Lafreniere: We, as a species, exist in a world in which exist
a myriad of data points. Upon these matrices of points we
superimpose a structure and the world makes sense to us.
The pattern of the structure originates within our biological
and sociological properties.
It is to be hoped that this makes more sense to the reader
now than it did at the beginning of our enquiry.
The function of the domesticated primate brain, insofar as
we have described it up to this point and leaving out the

higher, newer circuits, is to serve as an "organ of
adaptation" in Freud's phrase. Specifically, the oldest, most
primitive, most mechanical centers serve simple biosurvival. The more recent (500,000,000 year-old, roughly)
emotional territorial centers serve to maintain pack identity,
habitat-space and hierarchy. The distinctly hominid
semantic circuit (100,000-year-old?) makes maps and
models—reality-tunnels—which we tend to confuse with
reality itself, and, worse yet, with "all" of reality. The
(30,000? year old) moral-social circuit creates the
domesticated adult personality, or parent-role, or superego.
Now, obviously the third, semantic circuit works with and
for these other antique circuits. The maps and models it
makes are tools of adaptation, and what they adapt us to is
social roles in domesticated primate society. Thus, a
Midwestern Methodist is not "misusing his brain" as Arthur
Koestler thinks in constructing a Midwestern Methodist
tunnel-reality; that is precisely what his brain is for, to
adapt him to the Midwestern Methodist tribal system—to
impose the structure of Midwestern Methodist ideology
upon the myriad of data-points he encounters in his
lifetime.
The Chinese Maoist, the Iranian Moslem, the New York
Feminist, the Marin County Hedonist, etc. each has a
similar, equally arbitrary, equally complex reality-tunnel.
Each tunnel is also equally absurd when seen from outside.
The problems of the modern world arise from the fact that
these reality-tunnels are no longer isolated from each
other.
Throughout most of human history and up to 100 years
ago—up to 20 years ago, in some parts of the world—a
man or woman could lead their entire life snugly within the
cocoon of the local tunnel-reality. Today, we all constantly
collide with persons living in wildly different tunnel-realities.
This creates a great deal of hostility in the more ignorant,
vast amounts of metaphysical and ethical confusion in the
more sophisticated, and growing disorientation for all—a
situation known as our "crisis of values."
The average person has a deluge of contradictory and
conflicting reality-tunnels impinging on him or her, with
little training in either cultural or neurological relativism.
Speed of travel has increased by a factor of 1000 since
1900, and speed of communication by a factor of
10,000,000, according to J.R. Platt. The deluge is
accelerating and intensifying. One symptom is the fact that
TV Guide has been taken over by a band of terrified
conservatives, who cannot understand and can only dread
this downpour of "alien" signals; instead of being merely a
guide to what is on the tube, TV Guide has become a
continuous wail that the tube's tunnel-reality is wider,
stranger and more varied than the narrow tunnel-vision of
the small-town WASP.

There has also arisen a profession of "deprogrammers,"
socalled.
These are neuro-technicians who will, for a fee, kidnap a
child (even a "child" over 21) who has wandered off,
departed the parental reality-tunnel and been brainwashed
into the competing reality-tunnel of some new (i.e., not
established—not acceptable yet) "cult." This is known as
restoring the victim to normalcy.

It is all hypocrisy and neurological ignorance, of course. The
"de-programmers" are actually re-programmers. The
parental tunnel-reality is as arbitrary (and, to an outsider,
as bizarre) as that of any "cult." A special system of tricky
semantics allows most people and some courts to ignore
these facts. Just imagine what would happen if a wayward
child of Methodist parents had wandered into the Roman
Catholic Church, say, and the parents attempted to have
that child coercively "de-programmed" (reprogrammed)
into Methodism; or if the child had joined the U.S.
Army, like Calley, and the parents kidnapped him and tried
to reprogram him into civilian reality-tunnels.
These problems will not go away; and the abrasions they
cause, as various brainwashed robots continue to collide
with each other, will accelerate. Speed of travel and of
communication are still continuing to accelerate.
Fortunately, higher circuits are forming in the human brain
and offer broader vistas than the narrow tunnel-visions of
the antique circuits. That is the topic of our concluding
chapters.
Since everybody "prefers" one circuit over the others, there
are people in each society who are easily recognizable as
Narcissists (first-circuit robots), Emotionalists (secondcircuit robots), Rationalists (third-circuit robots) and
Moralists (fourth-circuit robots).
Rationalist robots, like the other robots, may be totally
mechanized or may have some slight flexibility, or
"freedom" built into their circuitry. The totally robotized
make up the vast horde of the Fundamentalist wing of the
Materialist church and the other True Believers in the
scientific paradigms of 1968, 1958, 1948 or whenever their
nervous systems stopped taking new imprints.
These are the people who are perpetually frightened and
dismayed by the large portion of human behavior mediated
through Circuit II mammalian politics. They think that
because this territorial- emotional ("patriotic") behavior is
not Rational, it should not exist. They accept Darwin as
dogma, but are nervous about "Darwinism" (because it
accepts mammalian politics as an Evolutionary Strategy
that has worked thus far) and are repulsed by the data of
ethology, genetics and sociobiology. They don't like the rest
of the human race much, because it is not guided by their
favorite circuit, and they are uneasily aware that the rest of
the human race does not like them much.
These Rationalist robots are also very uncomfortable with
the newer circuits—and some of them spend most of their
lives writing articles and books devoted to "proving" that
the newer circuits do not exist and that all scientists who
have recorded the behavior of these newer circuits are liars,
fools, bunglers, charlatans or some manner of Damned
Heretics.
Like the Emotional robot, the Moralistic robot, the Narcissist
robot etc., the Rationalist robot cannot be "argued" out of
his narrow reality tunnel. We can only emphasize, one more
time, that each and every reality-tunnel created by a
domesticated primate brain is a finite cross-section of that
brain's personal history; and each such finite reality-tunnel
is as "personalized" as the music of Bach or Beethoven, the
paintings of Rembrandt or Picasso, the novels of Joyce or
Raymond Chandler, the comedy of the Three Stooges or
Monty Python, the religions of Roman Catholicism or Zen
Buddhism, the politics of Libertarianism or the IRA, the
architecture of St. Peter's or Disney land...
And each of these art-works seems like "reality" to the
people who have created them and live in them.
Rationalism is just another such group art-work, a little less
tolerant than most, a little more useful to technologists
than any other, a little stupid when it can no longer
transcend the last paradigm it has created.
The totally robotized Rationalist, the one whose nervous
system has stopped growing entirely, can be recognized by
two signs:
He or she is constantly trying to prove that much of the
daily experience of the rest of humanity is "delusion,"
"hallucination," "group hallucination," "mass hallucination,"
"mere coincidence," "sheer coincidence," or "sloppy
research."
And he or she never thinks that any of his or her own
experience would fit into any of those categories.
EXERCISES

1. Become a pious Roman Catholic. Explain in three pages
why the Church is still infallible and holy despite Popes like
Alexander VI (the Borgia Pope), Pious XII (ally of Hitler),
etc.
2. For those of you who remember Mai Lai, become Lt.
Galley. Say aloud, and really feel and believe, "The Army
comes first. I'm for the Army all the way." If you don't
remember try Jerry Falwell. Say aloud, and really feel and
believe, "Help us fight moral decay, send your checks in
today."
3. Refute this whole book. Demonstrate that everybody else
has been brainwashed but you and your mother (father)
has the one, real, objective view of the universe.
4. Accept this book, if not in whole at least in general
outlines.
Assume you have been brainwashed. Try to learn as much
from every human you meet about their separate realitytunnel and see how much of it you can use to make your
reality-tunnel bigger and more inclusive. In other words,
learn to listen.
5. James Joyce said he never met a boring human being.
Try to explain this. Try to get into the Joycean head space,
where everybody is a separate reality-island full of mystery
and surprise. In other words, learn to observe.
6. Read Aldous Huxley's The Genius and the Goddess. Note
how the Circuit III scientific Genius reverts to Circuit I
helpless infant when his wife leaves him.
7. After experimenting with the Nazi reality-tunnel, the
Catholic reality-tunnel etc., re-enter your "normal" reality
tunnel.
Does it still seem totally objective, or do you begin to
recognize how much of it is your own software and
hardware running programs?
8. Finally, explore the tunnel-busting reality of Christopher
S. Hyatt' s book titled Undoing Yourself With Energized
Meditation and Other Devices. What tunnel-reality is he
selling and how sincere is he about his writing? Also, do you
think he has read my work and I his, or is this last
statement a gimmick of the publishers played on two
innocent authors and the trusting public or even worse did I
write his book, or could it be, that we are one and the
same?

CHAPTER ELEVEN
THE HOLISTIC NEUROSOMATIC CIRCUIT
But there is also in us an aspiration for the mastery of
Nature...
Health, strength, duration, happiness and ease, liberation
from suffering, are part of the physical transformation
which.. .evolution is called upon to realize.
— Sri Aurobindo, The Future Evolution of Man

THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY NEED NOT BE
POSTPONED UNTIL AFTER DEATH. IT CAN HAPPEN AT
ANY MOMENT.

This is a copy of Crowley's inspired drawing. For his
original see The Book of Thoth or study his Tarot
deck.
The beast with four heads represents the antique circuits;
the hedonic "laid-back" nude is neurosomatic rapture. The
serpent is "the rising of the kundalini serpent," a Hindu
metaphor for imprinting this Circuit V neurosomatic blisscontrol.
Calling all downs. Calling all downs to dayne. Array!
Surrection! ... It is just, it is just about to, it is just about to
rolywholyover.
— James Joyce, Finnegans Wake
The word "psychosomatic" has been around long enough to
be generally understood; unfortunately, it is another
semantic spook. The concept of "psyche" or "soul" was
borrowed from the theologians, who, being bankrupt, are in
no position to lend anything.
What we know and experience—our tunnel-reality—is what
registers on the brain and nervous system.
The phenomena of "faith healing," "regeneration,"
"rejuvenation," bliss, ecstasy, rapture, etc. have been
occurring for many thousands of years, in all known
cultures. In the pre-scientific language of yesterday's
psychology we would refer to such events as
"psychosomatic." In our deliberately modernistic and almost
sci-fi jargon, we prefer to call them neurosomatic.
The neurosomatic circuit of the brain is much more recent
than the antique circuits previously discussed. It does not
manifest in all human beings, and appears late in life,
usually, to those who do activate and imprint it.
Temporary neurosomatic consciousness can be acquired by
(a) the yoga practice of pranayama breathing and (b) for
those who can handle it, by ingestion of Cannabis drugs,
such
as
hashish
and
marijuana,
which
trigger
neurotransmitters that activate this circuit.
Of the former device, pranayama, Aleister Crowley—
certainly the most skeptical of all mystics—writes forcefully:
For mind and body alike there is no purgative like
pranayama, no purgative like pranayama.
For mind and body alike, for mind and body alike— alike!—
there is, there is, there is no purgative like pranayama—
pranayama!—pranayama! yea, for mind and body alike
there is no purgative, no purgative, no purgative (for mind
and body alike) no purgative like pranayama!
If this is not emphatic enough, Crowley adds elsewhere:
Pranayama is notably useful in quieting the emotions and
appetites... Digestive troubles in particular are very easy to
remove in this way. It purifies both the body and the mind
and should be practiced certainly never less than one hour
daily by the serious student.
To which he adds a footnote:
Emphatically. Emphatically. Emphatically. It is impossible to
combine pranayama properly performed with emotional
thought [second-circuit reflexes—R.A.W.]. It should be

resorted to immediately, at all times during life, when calm
is threatened.
This is very strong stuff from the mystic who filled his
books with jokes and jeers, and who always told his
students, not "Believe me," but "Don't believe me." About
pranayama, for once in his life, Crowley was serious.
In the experience of this author, pranayama will remove all
forms of depression, including profound grief and
bereavement;
it
will
soothe
anger
and
remove
resentments; it seems beneficial to all minor health
problems
and—occasionally—major
health
problems.
Hindus, who are professionals at pranayama, claim a great
deal more, such as: immunity to pain of all sorts, Samadhi
("union with God"), levitation, etc.
Most notably, pranayama creates neurosomatic Turn On:
sensory enrichment, sensual bliss, perceptual delight, and a
general laid-back Hedonic "high." Similar effects are
produced by voluntary isolation in a Lilly tank, by zerogravity (the astronaut's "mystical" experiences are all of
this neurosomatic variety) and, for the judicious or lucky,
Cannabis drugs, as said above.
Negative neurosomatic circuit effects are experienced by
amateur yogis, by many pot-heads, and by a large number
of schizophrenics. The neurosomatic feedback loop, in these
unfortunate cases, reverses the above description. Sensory
experience becomes unpleasant (any sound or touch is
painful), sensuality turns into acute discomfort with the
entire body, perceptions warp into nightmare, and general
anxiety is imprinted. Light is particularly terrifying and
painful, often associated with Hell or with "mind-control"
manipulated by unscrupulous enemies.
Gopi Krishna, a Hindu bureaucrat who took up yoga
originally only for health reasons, was abruptly catapulted
into a negative neurosomatic state for several years. All
sensations were so painful that he many times thought he
would die. The details, in his autobiography, Kundalini, are
pathetic, and sound much like schizophrenia. He came out
of this finally, entered a positive neurosomatic state, and
has been writing blissful books about the Perfection of the
All, typical of this circuit, ever since.
Nikola Tesla, the Yugoslav genius, went through the same
"Hell" or schizoid state, without yoga, in his teens. He came
out of the horrors with the scientific theory of alternating
currents worked out, a belief in extra-sensory perception, a
superhuman memory, and a streak of visionary
humanitarianism that led him into continuous conflicts with
the corporations that financed his more-than-100 major
electrical inventions. (He earned over $1,000,000 before
the age of 30, at a time when $1,000,000 was a lot of
money, and he died broke, trying to sell an invention he
said would abolish poverty.)
Most shamans, and many mystics, have been through
similar negative-to-positive neurosomatic sensitization.
Christian Scientists call it "chemicalization." St. John of the
Cross called it, poetically, the Dark Night of the Soul.
Cabalists call it "crossing the Abyss."
In Kazanzakis' The Odyssey: A Modern Sequel, Odysseus
sees a statue which seems to him urgently meaningful. The
statue was Kazanzakis' symbol for the evolution of these
circuits, which have been known (more or less) in various
symbolisms for a few thousand years. E.g., the "seven
souls" of the Egyptians, the ten "lights" of the Cabalists,
etc.
The Kazanzakis statue shows an animal (Circuit I), a
warrior above the animal (Circuit II), a scholar above the
warrior (Circuit III), a lover (Circuit IV), a face in agony
("chemicalization" the "Dark Night of the Soul", the
"crossing of the Abyss" which equals the entry to Circuit V
the hard way), a face in bliss (successful Circuit V
reimprinting) and a man turning into pure spirit (Circuit
VII). Circuit VI is missing in the schemata, as Circuit IV is
missing in Jung, and everything above Circuit III is missing
in Carl Sagan.
Some lucky souls jump to Circuit V bliss without passing
through the horrors of "chemicalization" and the "Dark
Night of the Soul."
The neurosomatic circuit is "polymorphous perverse," in
Freud's unappetizing terminology. This merely means that
the nervous system itself, taking over as driver, is now
directing the rest of the body. "Every act (becomes) an

orgasm," said Aleister Crowley, giving his own Tantric
emphasis to the polymorphous nature of this circuit.
The lives of the saints are full of stories which seem
"miracles" to the four-circuited majority, or are rejected as
"lies, hoaxes, yarns" by the three-circuited dogmatic
Rationalist, but which seem perfectly normal from the
viewpoint of five-circuited polymorphous consciousness.
The saint says he is in rapture, and full of gratitude to God,
for giving him such a feast for dinner as—plain bread and
water. (Of course, many a pot-head will understand that
degree of neurosomatic rapture...) The guru comes into the
room and his bio-energy1 has such a charge that a cripple
jumps up and is "healed"; the cripple merely acquired
neurosomatic turn-on by contact, as some people get
"contact high" when others are on drugs. The fire-walkers
in many shamanic traditions walk on the fire, as they tell
enquiring anthropologists, to prove their control over "the
spirit"—i.e., to demonstrate to themselves and others that
they have achieved high-quality neurosomatic tuning.
One faith-healer told the present author, "Most people die
of adrenaline poisoning." In our terminology, most people
have too much first-circuit anxiety and second-circuit
territorial pugnacity for their own good. They are literally
struggling for survival, as no other animals do, despite
Darwin. Most animals simply play most of the time, solve
problems of survival when they have to, or die of not
solving the problems; only humans are conscious of
struggling, and hence worried and depressed about the
Game of Life.
The faith-healer went on, "What cures them is realizing that
I'm not afraid." That is, contact with a fifth-circuit
personality, a person who controls his or her own Circuit II
adrenaline-trips, can be a catalyst, throwing the sufferer
upward into a personal fifth-circuit experience.
The avant-garde 20% of the population, due to the
Consciousness Movement (a secularization of much ancient
shamanic wisdom), already understands every "wild" idea
in the last few pages. They have had enough neurosomatic
experience
By which we mean nothing "mystical." It is now known that
many physical energies radiate from the body, and that even
chemical effects can be transmitted (experienced as emotional
"vibes") from one person to another, the chemicals acting as
stimuli to trigger neurotransmitter actions in the second person.

to know that they were once totally robotized (as most
people still are) and are knowingly engaged in acquiring
more neurosomatic know-how. When this reaches 51% of
the population, a major historic al revolution will have
occurred, as profound as the Life Extension Revolution.'
In McLuhan's terms, the fifth circuit is "non-linear" and
"global." That is, it is not limited by the one-thing-at-a-time
sequences of the semantic circuit; it thinks in Gestalts. This
is why it is so often connected with "intuition," which is a
way of thinking between and around data-points on the
perceptual screen—sensing what total field the points must
be part of.
The great musician has developed a remarkable feedback
between fifth-circuit Gestalt-ing and the third-circuit
function of coding such "coherent structures" into the
inspired symbolism of music. Music always leads to some
right-brain activity in listeners, and the fifth circuit is almost
certainly located in the right brain hemisphere.
Beethoven, we remember, was left-handed. Since the left
hand is neurologically linked to the polymorphous right
brain, one might say he was genetically inclined to right
brain activities, that is, to sensing coherent wholes, to
plunging into neurosomatic bliss almost "at will," and to
sensory-sensual raptness and rapture. Everybody "knows"
that the Sixth Symphony is "pantheistic," but whether
Beethoven was an ideological pantheist or not, that way of
responding to nature is normal and natural right-brain
Circuit V functioning. That is, anybody on the Fifth Circuit
will "talk like a pantheist" whether or not he has developed
a "philosophy" about pantheism. The miracle of Beethoven
is not that he felt the universe that way—a few thousand
fifthcircuit types throughout history have also felt and
sensed nature that way—but that he mastered the thirdcircuit art of music with such skill that he could
communicate such experiences, which is precisely what the
ordinary "mystic" cannot do.

The neurosomatic circuit probably began to appear around
30,000 years ago. (That is the conclusion of Barbara
Honnegger, who has made a profound study of European
cave paintings, coming to the conclusion that many of them
show exercises to
Please re-read this sentence, and think about it.

increase right-brain activity similar to those still used in
surviving shamanic and yogic traditions.)
This fifth circuit is bonded into the right cortex and
neurologically linked to the limbic (first circuit) system and
the genitalia.
These neural links explain the sexual metaphor of
"kundalini" or "serpent" energy used to describe this circuit
in systems as varied as Indian Tantra, Gnosticism and
Voodoo, and the Chinese yin yang (male-female) energies
associated with it.
Prolonged sexual play without orgasm always triggers some
Circuit V consciousness.
It is quite easy to determine if the Fifth Circuit has been
activated successfully or not. How often does a person go to
a doctor? If a mind researcher is "glowing" rather than
greyish, "bouncy" rather than craggy, if he or she has a
"sparkle"—and if he or she virtually never goes to a
doctor—the neurosomatic circuit has been mastered. As
Mary Baker Eddy once wrote (thereby making herself
hugely unpopular with those who love to talk of matters
mystical but have no empirical knowledge):
"The Word was made flesh." Divine Truth must be known
by its effects on the body as well as on the mind.
There is no tribe known to anthropology which doesn't have
at least one neurosomatic technician (shaman). Large-scale
outbursts of neurosomatic consciousness have occurred
frequently in all the major historical periods, usually being
stamped out quickly by the local branch of the Inquisition or
the A.M.A.; other outbursts have been co-opted and
diluted.
As we read in the New Testament:
And when he had called into him his twelve disciples, he
gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out,
and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of
disease...
And as ye go, preach, saying, the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast
out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.
— Matt 10: 1-8
It may or may not have happened exactly like that; as Mark
Twain would say, there might be a few stretchers in there.
But something like this, however much the evangelist may
exaggerate it, must have happened to account for
Christianity's rapid triumph over other, but probably less
effective, systems of opening the fifth circuit. Mithraism,
the Eleusinian cult at Athens, the Dionysian cults, etc. all
had age-old shamanic techniques for inducing neurosomatic
rapture; Christianity (at first) seems to have been superior
in creating neurosomatic control. In St. Paul's metaphor,
the "Old Adam" (Circuits I-IV) got bleached out, and the
"New Adam" (Circuit V) took over as the center of
consciousness and self-government. In another metaphor,
the body became the flexible clay and the awakened
(illuminated) brain became the sculptor.
In general, fourth-circuit problems take the form of guilt; "I
cannot do what I am supposed to do." Third-circuit
problems take the form of perplexity; "I cannot understand
how I got into this mess, or how to get out of it, or what is
expected of me," etc.
Second-circuit problems take the form of bullying or
cowardice:
"I will force them, or I will surrender and let them force
me."
First-circuit problems take the form of body symptoms: "I
feel rotten all over" gradually centering in, under enough
stress, on one acute disabling symptom.'
Fifth-Circuit neurosomatic consciousness bleaches out all
these problems at once. The disappearance of first-circuit
"physical" illnesses only seems more "miraculous" than the
transcendence of second-circuit emotionalism, third-circuit
perplexity and fourth-circuit guilt. It is the Cartesian
mind/body dualism that makes us think of such first-circuit
"physical" cures as somehow stranger or more spooky than
any rapid improvement on the other circuits.

One of the intents of our terminology is precisely to
transcend that Cartesian dualism, making all the circuits
equally comprehensible within one context.
The robotized Rationalist fears and resents Circuit V rapture
and its holistic intuitive faculties (just as the robotized
Emotionalist fears and resents Circuit III reason). Thus,
when the neurosomatic circuit feedback begins to function,
and the mutated Circuit V person tries to describe his or her
rapture and at-oneness, the Rationalist hastily mutters that
this is "merely subjective."
This last is Eric Berne's "Wooden Leg" game, which asks to be
relieved of social participation or interaction on the grounds of
being physically hors de combat.

Misery is "merely subjective," too, but that doesn't keep it
from hurting. The neurosomatic skill of transmuting all
experience, so that one is high and happy in a situation
where the fourcircuited majority would be miserable, is
worth learning for the very simple, egotistic reason that it's
more fun to be happy than to be in agony. It is also socially
beneficial, because, as Tim Leary often said, "You can't do
good until you feel good." Just as misery loves company,
the high and happy want everybody else to be high and
happy. (This first lesson the fifth-circuit adept has to learn
is to control this upsurge of altruism and not make a
nuisance of oneself by trying to force everybody to be
happy...)
The Rationalist is even more alarmed by the results of
prolonged fifth-circuit bliss, which includes the ability to
heal a wide variety of diseases both in oneself and in
others. Even the well documented current research on
endorphins—which gives us the beginning of a neurochemical explanation of how such healings operate—is
regarded with discomfort or hostility by the more robotized
Rationalists. It all sounds "metaphysical" and therefore it
cannot exist.1
There is nothing supernatural about the fifth circuit. It
merely appears "supernatural" by comparison to the earlier
circuits; but the third circuit, of which the Rationalist is so
proud, undoubtedly appeared "supernatural" when it first
appeared. (The Egyptians attributed speech and writing,
third-circuit functions, to divine intervention by the god
Thoth.) The fifth circuit, like the earlier circuits, is just
another evolutionary mutation, necessary to us as we move
toward a more complex neuro-social level.
"It's just like ordinary life, except that you're always a foot
above the ground," says an old Zen proverb.
This "floating" aspect of the fifth circuit is preparing us for
extraterrestrial migration.
One of the most interesting neurosomatic adepts in all
history, from the viewpoint of the present theory, was Mary
Baker Eddy.
Precisely because Mrs. Eddy was fundamentally naive and
1 Endorphins are neurotransmitters that trigger Circuit V. They
can be activated by cannabis drugs, psychedelics, meditation,
pranayama, or visualization of white light. The last is the most
common system used by "faith-healers" and was known to the
medieval Rosicrucians.

unaware of most of philosophy, she never realized that you
cannot speak or write about the Ineffable. She therefore
wrote about it at length. If her writings are hard to
decipher, if they often sound like "the ravings of a
disordered mind" (Aleister Crowley's description of mystic
writings, including his own), they also have moments of
astonishing lucidity. For instance, she knew and wrote with
total clarity that illness is fear and love is its cure. Most
psychologists are just beginning to comprehend that today,
over 100 years later.
"Perfect love casteth out fear" and that is how neurosomatic
awakening cures disease.
As Mrs. Eddy told one enquirer, "Love, love, love! That's all
you have to know to be a healer." Sixty years later,
unheeded by most of his profession, a Scottish psychiatrist,
lan Suttie, wrote that "The physician's love heals the
patient."
Another quote from Mrs. Eddy is appropriate at this point:
When understanding changes we shall gain the reality of
life, the control of soul over sense... This must be the
climax, before harmonious and immortal man is obtained
and his capabilities revealed.

To the ordinary scientifically-educated reader, this is
metaphysical gibberish. Let us try to re-translate it into our
own neurological metaphors:
When the brain develops its full potentials we shall gain a
new view of life and the control of neurosomatic bliss over
lowercircuit guilts, perplexities, emotions and 'body
symptoms'...
This is evolutionarily scheduled to occur before sixth-circuit
evolutionary awareness and physical immortality are
achieved.
We suggest that Mrs. Eddy, having activated a large part of
the right brain hemisphere, was able to think in Gestalts as
well as serving as transmitter of neurosomatic "healing" to
others.
She was looking down the DNA highway to the scientific
breakthroughs of the decade in which we now live.
Many have turned on the neurosomatic circuit due to
prolonged illness, especially if they grow impatient with
doctors and resort to self medication and/or faith-healing.
The bathroom of Nietzsche, according to Stefan Zweig,
looked "like a pharmacy shop," due to the large number of
drugs and medicines with which the philosopher treated his
chronic migraines. Gurdjieff employed cocaine, hashish and
yoga techniques (probably including pranayama) to treat
the incessant and increasing pains resultant from his war
wounds and two car accidents. The "harshness" of these
two philosophers, their contempt for ordinary human
suffering, their visions of the superhuman state beyond
emotion and pain, all probably derived from neurosomatic
Turn Ons alternating with acute pain. That is, they
experienced the whole of evolution from the lower circuits
to the full development of neurosomatic bliss, and were
expressing chiefly contempt for their own relapses into lessthan-blissful consciousness.
In the East, the control of the neurosomatic circuit is known
as dhyana, cha 'an or Zen\ the state is sometimes called
"Buddhamind" or "Buddha-body." To the ancient Greeks,
where rituals to achieve it with psychedelic drugs were
performed yearly at Eleusis, those who accomplished the
ritual successfully were called digenes, "twice-born." The
metaphor lingers in the "born again" terminology of
charismatic Christianity, and is symbolized by the myth of
the Resurrection of the Body.
Freud recognized this, state, vaguely, as the "oceanic
experience."
Gurdjieff calls this circuit the Magnetic Center.
Faith-healers and adepts of a few yogic schools seem to live
in neurosomatic consciousness permanently; most who
have achieved it at all tend to have it only in flashes, as
noted by Ezra Pound:
Le Paradis n'est pas artificial
but is jagged
For a flash,
for an hour.
Then agony,
then an hour.
This "Paradis," this condition of neurosomatic ("mindbody")
peace, should be considered a new brain circuit toward
which all humanity is evolving, slowly and painfully, out of
mammalian antique circuits. This progression, from primate
emotion to post-hominid tranquility, from "man" to "super
man." is the Next Step that mystics forever talk of; you can
hear it in most of Beethoven's later, major compositions.
As mentioned before, governmental brainwashers are
generally too puritanical to handle, or manhandle, the
socio-sexual circuit and content themselves with mindwashing and brainprogramming on the bio-survival,
emotional and semantic circuits, while outlaw bands like the
SLA or Mansonoids go further and reimprint the sociosexual circuit also.
It is necessary to note that some cults presently active on
this backward planet go even further than that and engage
in neurosomatic brainwashing.
A permanent neurosomatic circuit can only be imprinted by
prolonged practice of one of the yogic, Tantric or related
sciences, and perhaps good genes, good environments and
good luck generally.
Neurosomatic brainwashing—the most powerful form of
robotization—consists in temporary activation of the
neurosomatic circuit by the brainwasher, together with

assurances that only the brainwasher (or the "god" who
"acts through him") can turn on this circuit.
For full effect, this is, of course, proceeded by normal
brainwashing, The victim is first isolated from his or her
previous environment and trained to hook the bio-survival
circuit onto the "guru" and/or the Ashram or commune. The
emotional circuit is bent and broken by continuous attacks
upon status (ego), until the only emotional security left is
found in Total Submission to the group reality-island. The
re-infantilized victim is then ready to imprint any semantic
circuitry desired, from EST to Krishna to People's Temple,
etc. The socio-sexual circuit can then easily be programmed
for celibacy, for free love, or for whatever sexual game the
guru has selected. Then, and only then, the neurosomatic
buttons are pushed and ecstasy is "given" to the subject
"by" the guru.
Marjoe Gortner, a long-time practitioner of this science,
commented ironically in a film made after abandoning it for
a different career, "The marks never realized they could do
it" (push the neurosomatic buttons) "for themselves. They
all think they need me jacking them off!" Gortner is,
nowadays, unusually honest. The average charismatic
insists that the victims can never learn to do it for
themselves.
One of the greatest historical practitioners of this
neuroscience was Hassan i Sabbah, who used relatively
simple techniques, including, evidently, a time-release
capsule invented by the Sufi College of Wisdom in Cairo.
As I describe Hassan's technique — based on historical
records — in my novel, The Trick Top Hat: Two young
candidates dine with Hassan; the food is laced with a timerelease capsule. When asleep the candidates are taken to
Hassan's famous "Garden of Delights." The capsule had
released a heavy does of opium and they were quite
thoroughly unconscious and unaware of their surroundings.
The garden — of officially known as the "the Garden of
Delights" — covered several acres. Here candidates were
prepared for admission to the Order of the Assassins: they
were to become the most feared and legendary professional
killers in history. But here also, in this same garden, were
prepared candidates for admission to the Brotherhood of
Light, the Illuminati. The candidates, in fact, were prepared
the same way. They themselves selected, unknown to
themselves, which order they would enter — the political
Assassins or the mystic Illuminati.
Both young men were conveyed into the Garden of Delights
and placed several acres apart from each other. In a short
time, the second stage of the time-release capsule began to
work; cocaine was released into their bloodstreams,
thereby overwhelming the traces of the soporific opium and
causing them to awaken full of energy and zest. At the
same time, as they woke, hashish also began to be
released, so they saw everything with exceptional clarity
and all colors were jewel-like, brilliant, divinely beautiful.
A group of extremely comely and busty young ladies —
imported from the most expensive brothel in Cairo — sat in
a circle around each of the young candidates, playing flutes
and other delicately sweet musical instruments. "Welcome
to heaven," they sang as the awakening men gazed about
them in wonder. "By the magic of the holy Lord Hassan,
you have entered Paradise while still alive." And they fed
them "paradise apples" (oranges), far sweeter and stranger
than the earth-apples they had known before, and they
showed them the animals of paradise (imported from as far
away as Japan, in some cases), creatures far more
remarkable than those ordinarily seen in Afghanistan.
"This is heaven!" the first young man exclaimed, in ecstasy.
"Great is Allah, and great is the wise Lord Hassan Sabbah!"
But, twenty acres away, surrounded by similar lovely ladies
and other wonders, the second young man merely gazed
about him, smiled in contentment, and said nothing.
And then, in both cases, the houris of Paradise, as promised
in the Koran, began to dance, and as they danced, they
discarded one by one each of their seven veils. As the veils
were thrown off, more and more hashish was released from
the capsules and the young men saw with greater clarity,
felt with deeper intensity, experienced beauty and sexual
joy in a way completely unknown in their previous earth
lives.

Then, as each young man sat entranced by the beauty and
wonder of Heaven, the houris finished the dance, and nude
and splendid as they were, rushed forward in a bunch, like
flowers cast before the wind. And some fell at the
candidate's feet and kissed his ankles; some kissed knees
or thighs, one sucked raptly at his penis, others kissed the
chest and arms and belly, a few kissed eyes and mouth and
ears. And as he was smothered in this hashish-intensified
avalanche of love, the lady working on his penis sucked and
sucked and he climaxed in her mouth as softly and slowly
and blissfully as a single snowflake falling.
In a little while, there was no more hashish being released
and more opium began to flow into the bloodstream, the
young candidates slept again; and in their torpor, they were
removed from the Garden of Delights and returned to the
banquet hall of the Lord Hassan.
There they awoke.
"Truly," the first exclaimed, "I have seen the glories of
Heaven, as foretold in Al Koran. I have no more doubts. I
will trust Hassan i Sabbah and love him and serve him."
"You are accepted for the Order of Assassin," said Hassan
solemnly. "Go at once to the Green Room to meet your
superior in the order."
When this candidate had left, Hassan turned to the second,
asking, "And you?"
"I have discovered the First Matter, the Medicine of Metals,
the Elixir of Life, the Stone of the Philosophers, True
Wisdom and Perfect Happiness," said he, quoting the
alchemical formula.
"And it is inside my own head!"
Hassan i Sabbah grinned broadly. "Welcome to the Order of
the Illuminati!" he said, laughing.
Hassan i Sabbah was not the first or last student of the
ways in which sexuality can be transmuted into fifth-circuit
rapture.
Further to the East, there were Tantric schools within
Hinduism, Buddhism and Taoism, which taught techniques
by which prolongation of the genital embrace could explode
into dramatic brain-change. In the West, underground cults
of Gnostics, Illuminati, alchemists and witches kept similar
techniques as closely guarded secrets, for if the Holy
Inquisition ever learned of such practices the participants
would be denounced as devilworshippers and burned at the
stake.
In our own time, there has been a revolutionary upsurge of
these ancient neurological secrets, with an admixture of
more modern techniques. Tantric teachers are available in
many cities.
Masters and Johnson use quasi-Tantric practices to treat
sexual dysfunctions. As early ..as 1968, a poll by McGlothlin
showed that 85% of the pot-smokers in the country said
their chief interest in the Weed was its function as enhancer
of erotic sensation.
Vibrators and other sexual toys proliferate; Gays come out
of the closet; philosophers of a culture without repression
(Norman Brown, Henri Marcuse, Charles Reich) become
best-sellers.
Saul Kent, a writer on medical science for general
audiences, has even suggested that electronic sexual
surrogates can and will be manufactured in the near future.
(Your own Marilyn Monroe doll!) Instead of joining Tom
Wolfe and the neo-puritans in throwing up our hands in
horror at such an idea, let us consider it for a moment. Let
us see if we can peek outside our imprinted conditioned
reality-tunnel.
If a sexual android is possible in 2005 or 2050 or whenever,
why not a totally programmed sexual environment? Let us
call this, in memory of Herman Hesse, the Magic Theatre.
We start with what is concurrently available in high-priced
brothels in the hedonic Sun Belt section of America.
Massage, a first-circuit tranquilizer, has all the advantages
of the opiates without being habit-forming. Our Magic
Theatre, then, would include computerized body-relaxersand-energizers better than current massage techniques.
Porn movies are available, for stimulation, in the better
brothels. Our Magic Theatre would have them in 3D on all
four walls, obviously.
Marijuana and stimulants like cocaine or speed are available
in brothels everywhere. Our Magic Theatre would have
better chemical rapture-agents.

One can go on adding details, according to personal
fantasy, until one has created a room in which bliss can be
extended in all dimensions, indefinitely.
A strange thing has happened in constructing this
cyberneticized brothel. We seem to have gone beyond sex
to something that might be called meta-sex. While specific
genital pleasure might still be fun, it is hardly as important
as it seemed to us before we came into the multidimensional Pleasure Dome where all senses are stimulated
to ecstasy.
And the most peculiar thing about this bawdy sciencefiction projection is that we don't even need to build a
Magic Room. It is built into our brains already. We have
been describing the positive neurosomatic consciousness
which Freud called "polymorphous perversity" in one of his
Puritan moods and "the oceanic experience" in one of his
mystical moments. This is what the neurosomatically
turned-on brain feels like.
In alchemy this was known as "the multiplication of the first
matter" or "the Philosopher's Gold," which was unlike
ordinary gold in that it could not be spent or used-up, since
it perpetually multiplied and renewed itself. It is the "Third
Eye" of the Illuminati tradition, which transforms all it sees;
the eye of which Jesus speaks in his gnomic aphorism,
"The light of the body is the eye; if therefore thine eye be
single, thy whole body will be full of light."
— Matt 6:22
EXERCISES
1. Get the lesson book from the local Christian Science
Reading Room and read the lessons for a month.
2. Attend a Sufi week-end seminar.
3. Acquire my book Sex & Drugs: A Journey Beyond Limits
(New Falcon Publications) and try the Tantric exercises
there described.
4. Learn how to do pranayama properly, from an expert. (I
have tried describing this elsewhere, and have found there
is no way to prevent gross errors in verbal transmission of
this nonverbal knowledge. Get a Hindu to show you.)
5. Da Free John, an American guru, says you can reach
Illumination by constantly asking, "Who is the One who is
living me now?" Well—is it Circuit I consciousness, Circuit II
ego, Circuit III mind, Circuit IV sex-role, Circuit V Gestaltfield, or a higher circuit?
Who is it? Where is it? How old is it?
6. Dr. Aiden Kelly has suggested that the so-called
"unconscious" is more conscious than the so-called
conscious mind.
That is, the "unconscious" contains all the feedbacks of the
neurosomatic circuit and the other circuits that maintain
life.
Consider this idea. Is this the "One who is living you now"?

CHAPTER TWELVE
THE COLLECTIVE NEUROGENETIC CIRCUIT
It is no longer only the Right that is conservative. The
entire Left is also suddenly conservative. The liberal and the
radical Left have fallen behind.
— P.M. Esfandiary, Upwingers

The sixth circuit of the brain kicks into action when the
nervous system begins to receive signals from within the
individual neuron—from the RNA-DNA "dialogue," the
neurogenetic feedback system.
The entire nervous system, including the brain, has been
designed like the rest of the body, by the "code" within the
DNA molecule, which sends signals via messenger RNA

molecules to tell the organism what to do: Grow red hair.
Have blue eyes.
Stand up and walk now. Start to talk. Find a mate. Etc. Our
entire mental lives—our brain hardware and software—exist
within the perimeters of this DNA master-tape.
With neurogenetic consciousness, these DNA archives
become accessible to brain scanning, while awake. (They
are always accessible, as archetypes of the Jungian
"collective unconscious," during dreaming sleep.)
The first to achieve neurogenetic awareness, a few
thousand years ago, spoke of "memories of past lives," "reincarnation," "immortality," etc. That these neurological
adepts were speaking of something real, in the best
language of their day, is indicated by the fact that many of
them (especially Hindus and Sufis) gave marvelously
accurate poetic vistas of evolution millennia before Darwin
and foresaw Super-humanity before Nietzsche.
The Greeks called this "the vision of Pan," the Chinese "the
great Tao," Hindus "Atman consciousness." The numinous,
awful, sublime "God" "Goddess" and "Demon" figures who
appear in the initial stages of this Awakening are Jung's
"archetypes of the collective unconscious" and are
recognized as "victors from dream-time" by primitives, as
"them from Sidde" by witches, as the Weird People in a
thousand folk-traditions.
Gurdjieff calls this circuit the True Emotional Center.
The "akashic records" of Theosophy, the "phylogenetic
unconscious" of Dr. Stanislaus Grof, the "Gaia hypothesis"
of biologists Margulis and Lovelock—which holds that the
biosphere of this planet is one intelligent organism—are
three modern metaphors for this circuit. The visions of past
and future evolution described by those who have had
trans-time experiences during close-to-death or "clinical
death" trauma also describe the Circuit VI neurogenetic
reality-tunnel.
Specific exercises to trigger neurogenetic imprints are not
to be found in yogic teaching; it usually happens, if at all,
after many years of expertise in the kind of advanced rajah
yoga that develops Circuit V somatic bliss. Heavy does of
LSD, of course, always trigger temporary Neurogenetic
vistas.
The neurogenetic circuit is best considered, in terms of
current science, as the genetic archives activated by
excitement of anti-histone proteins—the DNA memory
coiling back to the dawn of life and containing also the
genetic blueprints for the future of evolution.
"I am He that was, and is, and shall be," a sentence from
the Egyptian Book of the Dead, in hieroglyph and in his own
handwriting, was found on the desk where Beethoven
composed the Ninth Symphony and all his later, aeonspanning "evolutionary" music. One judges from this, and
from the music itself, that Beethoven had opened the
neurogenetic circuit.
Here dwell primordial archetypes, far older than language
yet newer than tomorrow, Personifying this circuit as a
being, Crowley tells us:
...The "Babe in the Egg of Blue" [cf., the final image of
Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey—R.A.W.] ...represents
the Higher Self... The connection is with the symbolism of
the dwarf in mythology.., In his absolute innocence and
ignorance he is "the Fool"; he is the Savior...the "Great
Fool" of Celtic legend, the "Pure Fool" of Act I of
Parsifal...he is also the Green Man of spring festivals... So
we see him fully armed as Bacchus Diphues, male and
female in one, the bisexual Baphomet, and...Zeus
Arrhenothelus, equally bisexual... [He is shown in this full
form in the Tarot Trump XV, "The Devil"]... But the "small
person" of Hindu mysticism, the dwarf insane yet crafty of
many legends in many lands, is also this same... Silent Self
of a man, or his Holy Guardian Angel.
These images are not poetic whimsies by Crowley. They
reappear in the dreams of individuals (the personal myth of
the night), in the myths of all peoples (the impersonal
dreams of the species), and, of course, over and over in
UFO contact stories.
STUDY THE NEXT TWO IMAGES CAREFULLY

Circuit VI neurogenetic consciousness: This symbolizes a
pan-like god, displaying the concept of genetic memories
symbolized by the human-animal seed-forms in the
testicles.

Another archetype from the neurogenetic archives
("collective unconscious"). The Great Mother symbolizing
the genetic memories as illustrated by the flower, bird, etc.
The "language" of this circuit is the multi-level language of
Finnegans Wake, where Finnegan is Finn-again, Finn Mac
Cool of Irish legend reborn and Huck Finn again also, sailing
down "Missus Liffey," both the river Anna Liffey in Ireland
and Huck Finn's Mississippi; where Mark the Wan is King
Mark, cuckolded by Tristan, but Mark the Twy is Mark
Twain, married to a wife he called "Livvy" just like the Irish
river, and Mark the Tris is cuckolded Mark and cuckolding
Tristan in one; while Marcus Lyons is all of them, plus Mark
the apostle, his emblematic lion (always shown with him in
medieval art), Leo the lion, Leo in the zodiac and all
associated fire-signs, and one of the Four Old Men (Matt
Gregory, Marcus Lyons, Luke Tarpey and Johnny
McDougall) who haunt the dreamer all night long,
symbolizing the four evangelists, the four bedposts
surrounding the sleeper, the four antique circuits, the four
suits of Tarot or ordinary playing cards, the four elements
of the ancients, and all the other fours that Jung has found
omnipresent in the "collective unconscious." To parallel the
evolution of the first four circuits in human (and
mammalian) history, Joyce also offers the four stages of the
development of the "Gracehoper" (egg, larvae, chrysalis,
adult) and such dream-logical quartifications as "eggburst,
eggblend, eggburial, and hatch-as-hatch can," "their
weatherings and their marryings and their buryings and
their natural selections," "a human (pest!) cycling (pist!)
and recycling (past!) and there he goes (pust!) again," etc.
This archetypal circuit is replete with what Jung called
synchronicities—meaningful
coincidences—which
he
attributed to the circuit's roots in what he called the
"psychoid" level, below the personal and collective

unconscious, where "mind" and "matter" are not yet
differentiated—the royal highway of the DNA-RNA-CNS
(central nervous system) telegraph, in Tim Leary's
metaphor.
Such synchronicities are a sure sign that you are dealing
with the neurogenetic circuit. For instance, in a Finnegans
Wake study group, we were all convulsed with laughter
when noticing that "Toot and Come Inn" is not just a
parody of American cutesy-pie motel names but another of
Joyce's countless puns on Tutankhamen.
At this point, my wife entered the room to enquire what
was so funny. When we explained, she said, "That's a
synchronicity—I was just watching a TV program about
Tutankhamen."
And, of course, Joyce put the boy-king into the dream
because the main theme of Finnegans Wake, the main
theme of the neurogenetic circuit, is the survival of genetic
memory through time, symbolized by the Resurrection
myth; and Tut was dug up (resurrected) synchronistically,
just after Joyce started work in this epic.
As Joyce explains the logic of the neurogenetic circuit, "This
ourth of years is naught save brickdust and being humus
the same returns" (the earth gives back, in new forms,
what is buried) since "on the bunk of our breadwinning lies
the cropse of our seedfather" (comment superfluous, to
those who know The Golden Bough) and "Phall if you but,
will rise you must." The seed, the genetic code, and the
egg, cellular wisdom, sends the signal down the aeons; in
the similar metaphor of Nobel geneticist Hebert Muller, "We
are all giant robots manufactured by DNA to make more
DNA."
To the individual, the breaks in the chain of life/death
/life/death/life/death are ail-too real and painful; to the
seed-andegg wisdom of the neurogenetic circuit, the
seamless unity of lifedeathlifedeathlifedeathlife is the
greater reality.
The neurogenetic circuit is probably located in the right
neocortex and is more recent than the neurosomatic circuit
in the back sections of the right cortex.
Circuit VI neurogenetic consciousness allows you to
"converse" with the evolutionary architect who designed
your body—and billions and billions of others since the
dawn of life around 3-4 million years ago.
This "architect" is the greatest designer on this planet, as
Bucky Fuller has often commented. No human architect has
yet equaled Her efficiency or Her esthetics in such routine
products as roses, eggs, insect colonies, fish etc.
She (or He) can be personified in modern terms as Mother
DNA or Father Nucleic Acid. The Rationalist immediately
objects that such personification, however inescapable it is
to all who have encountered the Architect directly on this
circuit, is illegitimate, because She or He is unconscious.
The rebuttal, given by all Circuit VI adepts in all cultures
and all ages, is that She or He is not unconscious but
intoxicated, and it is a divine intoxication.
Less poetically, whether we "humanize" this "architect" into
a Big Momma or Big Daddy, or "animalize" it into a
jackalheaded being like the Egyptian, or "insectualize " it
into a divine Preying Mantis like one African tribe, or
"spiritualize" it into something totally abstract like Hindus
and Christian Scientists, we are only depicting one crosssection of this 3-4 billion-yearold Being. When we
"moleculize" it as DNA we are also only seeing one crosssection—the most useful cross-section for scientific
analysis. That is all that needs to be said, or should be said,
for the "scientific materialist" chemicalization of the
biosphere, and it is no contradiction of direct experience of
the Being itself via Circuit VI yogas, biological or chemical.
Indeed, the direct experience undoubtedly can and has
helped many scientists get a wider, more holistic view of
what is going on in evolution, which they have brought
down to Circuit III in better linguistic models. Teilhard de
Chardin is one, but not the only, example of a scientist
whose evolutionary model has been improved by such
direct Circuit VI experience.
For those who have not yet had Circuit VI experience—and
most of humanity will possess the technology to turn on
this circuit at will, within the next twenty years—this
evolutionary perspective might, possibly, be conveyed by a
series of quantum jumps in perspective, thus:

The individual can make mistakes, even fatal ones.
Consciousness of Circuits I-V is far from infallible; we all get
into messes, and sometimes they kill us.
The gene-pool can make mistakes, but less frequently. Most
gene-pools have a life-span far beyond any individual, by a
factor of many thousands. Obviously, if we judge
intelligence by survival, gene-pools—made up of the
information of many million individuals—are more
"intelligent" than any individuals, even geniuses. (Einstein
was not as smart as the Jewish people collectively. He
created Relativity and was smart enough to escape the
Nazis. The Jews, historically, created dozens of ideas as
important as Relativity and survived hundreds of pogroms.)
The species is even more intelligent than the gene-pool. It
lives millions of times longer than any individual, many
thousand times longer than any gene-pool.
The biosphere—Gaia—the DNA script—is more intelligent
than all individuals, gene-pools and species. It has survived
everything thrown at it for nearly 4 billion years, and is
getting smarter all the time. It is on the edge of achieving
immortality; through the sixth circuit it has a better eye to
see itself and judge its trajectories than ever before; it is
getting ready to leave this planet and expand across the
universe.
Beethoven, to cite him one more time, said "Anybody who
understands my music will never be unhappy again." That
is because his music is the song of the Sixth Circuit, of
Gaia, the Life Spirit, becoming conscious of Herself, of Her
powers, of Her own capacities for infinite progress.
EXERCISES
1. List at least 15 similarities between New York (or any
large city) and an insect colony, such as a bee-hive or
termite hill. (If you can't think of at least 15, read Edward
Wilson's Sociobiology.) Contemplate the information in the
DNA loop, which created both of these enclaves of high
coherence and organization, in primate and insect societies.
2. Read the Upanishads and every time you see the word
"Atman" or "World Soul," translate it as DNA blueprint. See
if it makes sense to you that way.
3. Contemplating these issues usually triggers Jungian
synchronicities. See how long after reading this chapter you
encounter an amazing coincidence—e.g., seeing DNA on a
license plate, having a copy of the Upanishads given to you
unexpectedly, seeing an image like Crowley's Pan or Great
Mother in a work of popular art etc.
4. Explain such a synchronicity, when it occurs, in Circuit III
Rationalist terms—mere coincidence etc.
5. Psychologist Barbara Honnegger explains synchronicities
by saying that the right brain hemisphere (where this circuit
is located) moves you in space-time to the place where the
synchronicity will occur, while the Rationalist left brain
invents rationalizations to go there. Synchronicities are a
language through which this circuit communicates with the
left brain, in this theory. Try explaining coincidences by that
theory. What messages is your right brain trying to send to
your left brain?
6. Jung and several of his disciples (e.g., Coleman, Steiger,
Fiedler) have suggested that UFOs are messages from this
collective DNA circuit to the left brain. What do such
messages mean? What is the right brain trying to tell us?

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
INTRODUCTION
TO
THE
METAPROGRAMMING
CIRCUIT
It is the human situation that is basically tragic. Right and
Left revolutionaries cannot alter this basic dilemma. For
instance, the most radical Left-wing group has no program
to overcome death.
The entire Right-Left establishment is still death oriented.
-P.M. Esfandiary, Upwingers

CAN 100,000 PEOPLE HALLUCINATE AT ONCE?
How else do you explain history?
I once saw a cartoon—I forget where—that seems to me to
summarize the central fact of neurological relativism.
A cat approaches a dog and says "Meow." The dog looks
confused. The cat repeats, "Meow!" The dog still looks
confused.
The cat repeats, more emphatically, "MEEOW!!!" Finally,
the dog ventures, "Bow-wow?" The cat stalks away
indignantly, thinking "Dumb dog!"
Of course, human communication, and our great
philosophical debates, cannot be on this primitive level. Of
course!
Nonetheless...
Between May and October, 1917, in Fatima, Spain,
occurred the best documented series of "miracles" in
modern history. As everybody knows, it began when three
illiterate peasant girls had a vision of the Blessed Virgin
Mary. Please note at once that it is easy, and tempting, for
the Rationalist, and the non-Catholic generally, to treat this
first incident as "merely" hallucination.
Note next how hard it is to make that explanation stick as
the subsequent details are narrated.
At the second "visitation of the Virgin" in June there were
fifty witnesses. All agreed that they heard an explosion and
saw a puff of smoke. (Only the three girls on this and
subsequent occasions ever saw the Lady.) Shall we assume
now that, in addition to hallucinating girls we must add a
practical joker with a smoke bomb, to make sense of what
was going on?
At the third visitation in July there were 4500 witnesses. All
of them heard an explosion again, at the Lady's departure,
and most of them claimed they heard humming and
buzzing noises while the children spoke to her. (This
humming and buzzing is common in later UFO stories...)
On August 13, there were 18,000 witnesses, who saw, or
hallucinated a symphony of weirdities, including flowers
falling out of the sky, another explosion, bright flashes of

light on the clouds and on the ground (crimson, pink, yellow
and blue) and a luminous globe spinning through the sky,
just like a modern UFO.
On September 13, there were 30,000 witnesses. All saw the
luminous "UFO" again, and there was another downpour—
not flowers this time, but glistening globules of light that
got smaller as they descended and "melted" near ground
level. Dr. Carl Sagan would have solemnly told you, with his
bare face hanging out, that all 30,000 witnesses were
hallucinating simultaneously.
October 13, the last "miracle" was witnessed by 70,000 at
the scene, and 30,000 others for hundreds of miles around
claimed to see some of the phenomena. Some said that the
sun plunged directly toward the earth, but others that a
globe "big and bright as the sun" had appeared and did the
plunging. This was accompanied by flashes of red, violet,
blue and yellow, together with a "heavenly" perfume
permeating the air.
It is claimed that "thousands" of people were converted to
Catholicism by these events. Please note that if it had all
happened 50 years later in 1967, many of these people
would have been converted to the newer mystique of the
Space Brothers.
Nietzsche once said, "We are all greater artists than we
realize."
It is a function of the above record (and this book as a
whole) to make that obscure joke totally clear to every
reader.
But, but, but—All 100,000 witnesses who saw some of the
phenomena associated with the last Fatima "miracle" must
have been hallucinating, of course. This is the most
comfortable and conservative way of dealing with such
events, and one does not have to be as narrow as Dr.
Sagan to prefer such a simple explanation.
Still...if 100,000 people can hallucinate simultaneously, and
if, as history assures us, many millions can share a
"religious" or political delusion simultaneously, only a man
as rigidly dogmatic as Sagan can avoid asking the most
disturbing questions about the origin of his own beliefs and
perceptions.
Cromwell once addressed the Irish rebels, saying, "I
beseech you, in the bowels of Christ, think it possible that
you might be wrong." History does not record that
Cromwell ever addressed the same remark to himself.
Each
of
us
is
trapped
in
the
reality-tunnel
(assumptionconsumption)
his
or
her
brain
has
manufactured. We do not "see" it or "sense" it as a model
our brain has created. We automatically, unconsciously,
mechanically "see" and "sense" it out there, apart form us,
and we consider it "objective." When we meet somebody
whose separate tunnel-reality is obviously far different from
ours, we are a bit frightened and always disoriented.
We tend to think they are mad, or that they are crooks
trying to con us in some way, or that they are hoaxters
playing a joke.
Yet it is neurologically obvious that no two brains have the
same genetically-programmed hard wiring, the same
imprints, the same conditioning, the same learning
experiences. We are all living in separate realities. That is
why communication fails so often, and misunderstandings
and resentments are so common. I say "meow" and you
say "Bow-wow," and each of us is convinced the other is a
bit dumb.
According to reliable statistics, over 100,000,000 citizens of
the U.S. "believe in" UFOs and at least 15,000,000 have
seen a UFO. The system of ideas, rumors, myths, hopes
etc. clustered about the UFO phenomenon may be the most
powerful sociological force for change currently acting upon
our society, as Dr. Jacques Vallee recently stressed in an
address to a special United Nations committee on the UFO
mystery.
The UFO debate, or quarrel, hinges upon the two categories
which we find central to our thesis—the innocent-looking
ideas of "inside" and "outside." Broadly speaking, the UFO
"skeptics" are those who claim the UFO is "inside" the UFO
observer ("hallucination," misidentification, etc.), while the
UFO "believers" claim the UFO is "outside" (objectivity).
As the semanticist Alfred Korzybski often warned, when we
split verbally that which is never split existentially we
introduce fallacies into our thinking. Korzybski's favorite

example was the matter of "space" and "time"; for in
experience, we never encounter "space" without "time" or
"time" without "space," i.e.. a year measures the space the
Earth moves around the sun, and the space the Earth
travels in one orbit gives us the time we call a "year." The
verbal separation of "space" and "time" became such a
problem in late 19th Century physics that paradoxes and
contradictions multiplied endlessly; and this was only
resolved when the genius of Einstein went back before the
verbal categories, realized we had created them, and
started physics over from the ground up on the simple
existential fact that we never encounter "space" or "time"
separately but only the undifferentiated "space-time
continuum."
Applying this Einsteinian operational orientation to the UFO
problem, we observe that we never hear of a UFO without a
human observer. In fact, even the UFOs "seen" on radar
become UFOs (unidentified, rather than identified, flying
objects) through processes of evaluation in the nervous
system of the radar operator.
It is, therefore, the Einsteinian and operational approach to
accept the seamless unity of UFO-observer and cease to
separate them into "UFO" and "observer."
The types of "critters" who appear in human-UFO
experiences include the following:
Black men, blue men, green men, black-faced men with
green bodies;
Fish-scaled men, hairy dwarfs, huge-headed bald dwarfs,
armless humanoids;
Dwarfs with three fingers, dwarfs with eight fingers,
clawhanded men, one-eyed men;
Elephant-eared men, long-haired sexless WoMen, manapes, man-birds;
Robots, beer-can shaped entities walking on fins, headless
things, dwarfs in Nazi uniforms;
Sinister "Greys" who engage in sexual and/or genetic
tamperings with humans.
This is only a partial zoology of the UFO experience.
The craft favored by this odd crew includes big blobs of
light, little blobs of light, clusters of lights, hard metallic
ships, flatbottom discs, conic discs, coin-like discs, domed
discs, ovals, spheres, spheroids, cigar-shaped craft, cubes,
tetrahedrons,
crescents,
"eggs,"
teardrop
shapes,
boomerangs. This is also a partial list.
"We are being invaded by beings from dozens of galaxies,"
said Otto Binder, a believer in the extraterrestrial theory of
UFOs, when this list was shown to him.
One consistency does appear in this confusing picture:
those who have had Close Encounters show marked
personality change afterwards. At one extreme we find
paranoid and schizophrenic breakdowns or acute anxieties
requiring hospitalization; at the other, "illuminations"
similar to those of Buddha, Mohammed, Jesus, St. Paul. In
the middle we find a great deal of messianic fanaticism
typical of vulgar religiosity everywhere.
Other statistical clusterings can be found in the literature.
Blinding lights are very common—do we recall St. Paul and
the thousands at Fatima? And drumming and humming
noises are also common—as in shamanism everywhere, at
Fatima, and even in so sophisticated a brain-change system
as Tibetan Buddhism.
Let nobody underestimate this phenomenon just because it
is irrational. It is equally irrational for 900 people to drink
cyanide because a paranoid on pep-pills tells them to, and
Nazism and the Holy Inquisition were equally irrational. As
Dr. Jacques Vallee told the UN committee on UFOs, It is the
third aspect o/the UFO phenomenon which deserves full
attention... The third aspect is the social belief system
which has been generated by...the expectation of space
victors. This belief...is creating new religious, cultural and
political concepts of which social science has taken little
notice. [Italics in original.]1
Rationalism—a philosophy for which we have great
sympathy, as for a backward relative—wants to take UFO
"observers" by the collar, shake them vigorously and shout
in their ears, "Look you so and so. It never happened!—you
got it, buddy?"
Well, maybe it didn't—and then again maybe it did. In
either case, UFO-observers are all better artists than they
realize.

It should also be obvious that the Rationalist is a better
artist than he realizes. Amid millions of people who have or
create such experiences every day in every city on the
planet, the Rationalist has created a separate reality in
which such things never happen—to him.
Flying saucers and ESP (not to mention Fatima and its
"miracles") may seem far removed from Patty Hearst's
Dr. Carl Jung has compared the UFOs in general and Close
Encounters in particular with the "signs and wonders" that
accompanied the breakdown of Roman paganism and the rise of
Christianity. It is ironic to remember that the Rationalists of
that time—the Stoics, Epicureans and other heirs of the Greek
philosophical-skeptical tradition— regarded Christianity with as
much contempt as the modern Rationalist has for UFOs. They
simply refused to look at what was happening, until their
society was overcome by the paradigm shift to the new realitytunnel.

"decision" to become a bank-robber. We are trying to show
that there is an intimate connection between all the
weirdities of consciousness.
The process by which we construct a kitchen chair out of a
whirl of atomic energy is just as creative (artistic) as the
processes by which Patty Hearst turned her father from a
beloved parent into a Pig Imperialist.
Your whole world has been constructed that way. You are
"reconciled" to death because you have been told, all your
life, that everybody must die. Only the Extropian minority—
which can be found wherever scientists, science-fiction
fans, Futurists and space enthusiasts gather—is living in the
separate reality that claims we no longer have to accept
this axiom of despair.
The revolutionaries of any decade will become the
reactionaries of the next decade, if they do not change their
nervous system, because the world around them is
changing. He or she who stands still in a moving, racing,
accelerating age, moves backwards relatively speaking.
Thus, there are hundreds of "Thanatological" seminars
available in the once revolutionary but now-reactionary
Consciousness Movement. These seminars are designed to
reconcile people to death, and are about as reactionary as
seminars c. 1860 designed to reconcile Black people to
slavery.
Only one offshoot of the Consciousness Movement, the
Theta Seminars of Leonard Orr, are designed to prepare
people for our oncoming immortality.
EXERCISES
1. Buy a copy of Christian Science Sentinel and read all the
faith healings reported that month. Note that each "miracle"
is attributed to the correct teaching as transmitted by Jesus
Christ and Mary Baker Eddy.
2. Buy a copy of The Peyote Cult by anthropologist Weston
LeBarre which attributes the same effects to autosuggestion.
3. Read Brain/Mind Bulletin for any recent year, and
observe that similar healings are reported regularly and
attributed to endorphins in the brain.
4. Witnesses have testified that Jim Jones (like a few other
professional faith-healers) used skills part of the time, a
shill being a person who pretends to be ill and pretends to
be cured, in order to get the audience in the right frame of
mind. Re-read all the miracles in the New Testament, using
each of these filters:
Jesus had the correct teaching; Jesus was using autosuggestion; the sufferers' brains unleashed endorphins
when Jesus gave them positive auto-suggestion; Jesus was
a con-man using shills.
Since you weren't there at the time, does your choice
among these theories, or your combination of them, tell
more about Jesus or more about your own favorite realitytunnel?
5. Did you ever really give a good trial to our exercise, "I
can now exceed all of my previous hopes and ambitions?"
Try it; and at the same time, try, "I can be healthier than I
have ever been before."

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
THE METAPROGRAMMING CIRCUIT
Man is ignorant of the nature of his own being and powers,
Even his idea of his limitations is based on experience of

the pad. There is therefore no reason to assign theoretical
limits to what he may be, or what he may do.
— Aleister Crowley, Magick

According to Alfred Korzybski, any "idea" or mental state is
a brain circuit which the brain itself can contemplate,
thereby having an idea about the idea, or a mental state
about the mental state, etc. There is no theoretical or real
limit to the higher-ordering process; it is the "Infinity
Within" of which mystics speak.
Dr. John Lilly says, "In the province of the mind what is
believed true is true or becomes true within limits to be
learned by experience and experiment. These limits are
further beliefs to be transcended. In the province of the
mind there are no limits."
Mind and its contents are functionally identical: My wife
only exists, for me, in my mind. Not being a solipsist, I
recognize the converse: I only exist, for her, in her mind.
Lest the reader exclaim, like Byron of Wordworth, "I wish
he would explain his explanation!", let us try it this way: If I
am so fortunate as to be listening to the Hammerklavier
sonata, the only correct answer, if you ask me suddenly,
"Who are you?" would be to hum the Hammerklavier. For,
with music of that quality, one is hypnotized into rapt
attention: there is no division between "me" and "my
experience."
In heavy meditation, when I think of me, I am me; when I
think of me and you, I am me and you; when I think of you
alone, I am not there anymore; when I think of God, I am
God.
What I see with my eyes closed and with my eyes open is
the same stuff: brain circuitry.
Mathematician J.W. Dunne puts the matter in a parable. A
painter, who had escaped from the asylum to which he was
(justly or unjustly) confined, decided to paint the field in
which he found himself. Finished, he looked at the result
and realized that something was missing: namely, himself
and his canvas, which were part of the field. So he started
over and painted himself and his canvas in the field. But,
examining the results with philosophical analysis, he
realized that something was still missing: namely, himself
and his canvas on which he was painting himself and his
canvas in the field. So he started a third time.. .and a
fourth....ad infinitum.
We think of the paintings of M.C. Escher at this point: Or
we recall the old folk-tale of the farmer who set out to
market with ten donkeys, on one of which he rode. After a
while, he began to wonder if any of the donkeys had
strayed and he began counting there seemed to be only
nine. Disturbed, he dismounted and walked around the
herd, counting carefully—and there were ten after all. So he
remounted and went on riding, until worry beset him again.
So he counted another time.. .and there were nine. So,
once again, he dismounted and walked about counting
carefully to find ten. The process is repeated until he finally

solves the problem, carrying one donkey on his back and
driving the other nine before him.
The "disappearing donkey" trick is the epitome of ideas
about ideas about ideas, paintings of paintings of paintings,
etc. The disappearing donkey is a synecdoche of the metaprogramming circuit of the nervous system.
The meta-programming circuit—known as the "soul" in
Gnosticism, the "no-mind" (wu-hsin) in China, the White
Light of the Void in Tibetan Buddhism, Shiva-darshana in
Hinduism, the True Intellectual Center in Gurdjieff—simply
represents the brain becoming aware of itself. The artist
seeing himself in his painting, seeing himself seeing himself
in his painting... In the Zen metaphor, it is a mirror that
reflects anything, but does not hold onto anything. It is a
conscious mirror that knows it can always reflect something
else by changing its angle of reflection.
This is analyzed mathematically in G. Spencer Brown's Laws
of Form; an analog, using not Brown's math but Godel's,
and employing illustrations from the music of Bach and the
paintings of Escher, is Hofstadter's Godel, Escher, Bach.
Most of the occult literature of the world—aside from the
95% of it that is sheer rubbish—consists of tricks, gimmicks
and games (which the Hindus call upaya, "clever ways") to
trigger meta-programming consciousness. This generally
means leading the student "all around Robin Hood's barn"
as many times as are necessary, until the poor victim
discovers that he has created the barn himself.
For instance, a popular game with California occultists—I do
not know its inventor—involves a Magic Room, much like
the Pleasure Dome discussed earlier except that this Magic
Room contains an Omniscient Computer.
To play this game, you simply "astrally project" into the
Magic Room. Do not ask what "astral projection" means,
and do not assume it is metaphysical (and therefore either
impossible, if you are a materialist, or very difficult, if you
are a mystic). Just assume this is a gedankenexperiment, a
"mind game." Project yourself, in imagination, into this
Magic Room and visualize vividly the Omniscient Computer,
using the details you need to make such a superinformation-processor real to your fantasy.
You do not need any knowledge of programming to handle
this astral computer. It exists early in the next century; you
are getting to use it by a species of time-travel, if that
metaphor is amusing and helpful to you. It is so built that it
responds immediately to human brain-waves, "reading"
them and decoding their meaning. (Crude prototypes of
such computers already exist.)
So, when you are in this magic room, you can ask this
Computer anything, just by thinking of what you want to
know. It will read your thought, and project into your brain,
by a laser ray, the correct answer.
There is one slight problem. The computer is very sensitive
to all brain-waves. If you have any doubts, it registers them
as negative commands, meaning "Do not answer my
question." So, the way to use it is to start simply, with
"easy" questions. Ask it to dig out of the archives the name
of your second-grade teacher.
(Almost everybody remembers the name of their first grade
teacher—imprint vulnerability again—but that of the second
grade teacher tends to get lost.)
When the computer has dug out the name of your second
grade teacher, try it on a harder question, but not one that
is too hard. It is very easy to sabotage this machine, but
you don't want to sabotage it during these experiments.
You want to see how well it can be made to perform.
It is wise to ask only one question at a time, since it
requires concentration to keep this magic computer real on
the field of your perception. Do not exhaust your capacities
for imagination and visualization on your first trial runs.
After a few trivial experiments of the second-grade-teacher
variety, you can try more interesting programs. Take a
person toward whom you have negative feelings, such as
anger, disappointment, feeling-of-betrayal, jealousy or
whatever interferes with the smooth, tranquil operation of
your own bio-computer.
Ask the Magic Computer to explain that other person to
you; to translate you into their reality-tunnel long enough
for you to understand how events seem to them. Especially,
ask how you seem to them.
The Poet Prayed:

Oh would some power the giftie gie us
To see ourselves as others see us
This computer will do that job for you; but be prepared for
some shocks which might be disagreeable at first.
This super-brain can also perform exegesis on ideas that
seem obscure, paradoxical or enigmatic to us. For instance,
early experiments with this computer can very profitably
turn on asking it to explain some of the propositions in this
book which may seem inexplicable or perversely wrongheaded to you, such as "We are all greater artists than we
realize" or "What the Thinker thinks, the Prover proves" or
"mind and its contents are functionally identical."
This computer is much more powerful and scientifically
advanced than the rapture-machine in the neurosomatic
circuit. It has total access to all the earlier, primitive
circuits, and overrules any of them. That is, if you put a
meta-programming instruction into this computer; it will
relay it downward to the old circuits and cancel
contradictory programs left over from the past. For
instance, try feeding it on such meta-programming
instructions as:
1. I am at cause over my body.
2. I am at cause over my imagination.
3.I am at cause over my future.
4. My mind abounds with beauty and power.
5.I like people, and people like me.
Remember that this computer is only a few decades ahead
of present technology, so it cannot "understand" your
commands if you harbor any doubts about them. Doubts
tell it not to perform.
Work always from what you can believe in, extending the
area of belief only as results encourage you to try for more
dramatic transformations of your past reality-tunnels.
This represents cybernetic consciousness; the programmer
becoming self-programmer, self-metaprogrammer, metametaprogrammer, etc. Just as the emotional compulsions of
the second circuit seem primitive, mechanical and,
ultimately, silly to the neurosomatic consciousness, so, too,
the reality maps of the third circuit become comic,
relativistic, game-like to the metaprogrammer.
"Whatever you say it is, it isn't, " Korzybski, the
semanticist, repeated endlessly in his seminars, trying to
make clear that third-circuit semantic maps are not the
territories they represent; that we can always make maps
of our maps, revisions of our revisions, meta-selves of our
selves.
"Neti, neti" (not that, not that), Hindu teachers traditionally
say when asked what "God" is or what "Reality" is.
Yogis, mathematicians and musicians seem more inclined to
develop meta-programming consciousness than most of
humanity.
Korzybski even claimed that the use of mathematical scripts
is an aid to developing this circuit, for as soon as you think
of your mind as mind1, and the mind which contemplates
that mind as mind2 and the mind which contemplates
mind2 contemplating mind1 as mind3, you are well on your
way to meta-programming awareness. Alice in Wonderland
is a masterful guide to the metaprogramming circuit
(written by one of the founders of mathematical logic) and
Aleister Crowley soberly urged its study upon all students of
yoga.
R. Buckminster Fuller illustrates the meta-programming
circuit, in his lectures, by pointing out that we feel puny in
comparison to the size of the universe, but only our bodies
(hardware) are puny. Our minds, he says—by which he
means our software— contain the universe, by the act of
comprehending it.
The seventh, meta-programming circuit is the most recent
in evolutionary time and seems to be located in the frontal
lobes.
That is why the traditional Hindu exercise to activate it is to
fix the consciousness in the front of the forehead and hold it
there, hour after hour, day after day, year after year, until
the metaprogrammer awakes and you begin to perceivecreate infinite realities where before there was only one
static jail-cell "reality" in which you were trapped.
As said above, this circuit is the "soul" of the Gnostics, as
distinct from the self. The self seems to be fixed and firm,
but is not; that is, whatever circuit you are operating on at
the moment is your "self at that moment. If I point a gun at

you, you go to Circuit I consciousness at once, and that is
your "self at that instant. But if you are sexually attracted
to somebody, you go to Circuit IV and that is your "self
until you are orgasmically satisfied (or hopelessly
frustrated). Most of the preliminary exercises in Sufi and
Gurdjieff schools consist in making you aware that the "self
is not constant but shifts back and forth between the
imprints on the various circuits.
The "soul" or Circuit VII is constant, because it is, as the
Chinese say, void or no-form. It plays all the roles you
play— oral dependent, emotional tyrant, cool rationalist,
romantic seducer, neurosomatic healer, neurogenetic
Evolutionary Visionary— but it is none of them. It is plastic.
It is no-form, because it is all forms. It is the "creative
Void" of the Taoists.
If this begins to sound like nonsense, that is inevitable on
this level. As Lewis Morgan notes, in books on linguistics
there always comes a point at which the prose itself
becomes wildly incomprehensible, disintegrating into
nonsense.
The same happens, Morgan notes, beyond a certain point in
modern mathematics:
Godel's Theorem was once explained to me by a patient, a
gentle mathematician, and just as I was taking it all in,
nodding appreciatively at'the beauty of the whole idea.. .it
all turned into nonsense inside my head.
It happens in both linguistics and mathematics, because it
happens in consciousness itself, language and math are just
models of consciousness.
"Mind" is a tool invented by the universe to see itself; but it
can never see all of itself, for much the same reason that
you can't see your own back (without mirrors). Or as Alan
Watts liked to say, because the tongue ultimately cannot
taste the tongue.
Ideas about ideas—mathematics about mathematics
(Godel) —language about language—consciousness of
consciousness— the whole seventh circuit brings us into
what Hofstadter calls Strange Loops. Like the legendary koko bird, we follow our own tail around in ever-narrowing
circles, but unlike that mythic bird we never complete the
process by flying up our own rectums and disappearing. It
just seems like we're about to selfdestruct in that colorful
way, and we decide that what we have been reading, or
thinking, or perceiving, must be "nonsense."
It is not nonsense. We are merely confronting infinity where
we least expected to encounter it—in our own lonely selves.
Physics joined linguistics, mathematics and psychology in
this mete programming hall of mirrors when Schrodinger
demonstrated that quantum events are not "objective" in
the Newtonian sense. For fifty years since then, physicists
have been struggling to build a system that will get them
out of this Strange Loop. The results have been as funny as
a Zen koan.
For instance, Niels Bohr proposed the Copenhagen
Interpretation, which merely says, in the manner of Godel,
that our equations do not describe the universe really. They
describe the mental processes we have to put ourselves
through to describe the universe. True enough—and this
whole book is a Copenhagen Interpretation of psychology
and owes everything to Dr. Bohr, but we are still in a
Strange Loop, and most physicists want to get out.
Dr. John von Neumann proved that there was no way out.
This is technically known as Von Neumann's Catastrophe of
the Infinite Regress, and it merely shows that any device
that will get us out of the first Strange Loop (the
Copenhagen collapse of objectivity) will just lead us into a
second Strange Loop; and any way out of that will lead to
an inexorable third Strange Loop; and so on, forever.
Everybody is still trying to refute von Neumann; but nobody
has been successful.
"I can't get out—my horns won't fit through the door.
The meta-programming circuit is not a trap. As Joyce would
say, it only looks as like it as damn it. Simply accept that
the universe is so structured that it can see itself, and that
this selfreflexive arc is built into our frontal lobes, so that
consciousness contains an infinite regress, and all we can
do is make models of ourselves making models...
Well, at that point, the only thing to do is relax and enjoy
the show.

This is what the Hindus call Shiva-darshana, or the divine
dance. You are still in life, or life is in you, but since there
are infinite aspects to everything, especially to the "you"
who is observing/creating all these muddles and models,
there are no limits.
The only sensible goal, then, is to try to build a realitytunnel for next week that is bigger, funnier, sexier, more
optimistic and generally less boring than any previous
reality-tunnel.
And once you have built that bigger, funnier, happier
universe of thought, build a bigger and better one, for next
month.
EXERCISES
1. If all you can know is your own brain programs
operating, the whole universe you experience is inside your
head. Try to hold onto that model for at least an hour. Note
how often you relapse into feeling the universe as outside
you.
2. Consider the belief system or reality-tunnel of an
educated reader 1200 years ago—in 797 AD. How much of
that tunnel still seems "Real"? How much in our realitytunnel was unknown or invisible then?
3. Consider the reality-tunnel of an educated person 1200
years from now—in 3197 AD. How much of our realitytunnel will still seem "Real"? How much of the 3197 AD
reality-tunnel is unknown or invisible to us?
4. Re-read Moses' encounter with I AM WHO I AM in
Deuteronomy. Try the theory that Moses was talking to his
own meta-programming circuit.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
DIFFERENT MODELS & DIFFERENT MUDDLES
It1 is not just a riot of blots and blurs and disjointed
jottings linked by spurts of speed... it only looks as like it as
damn it.
— James Joyce, Finnegans Wake

"REALITY" IS THE TEMPORARY RESULTANT OF
CONTINUOUS STRUGGLES BETWEEN RIVAL GANGS
OF PROGRAMMERS.
And every moment is a new and shocking Transvaluation of
all we have ever been.
— T.S. Eliot, Four Quartets

When a paradigm shift occurs—when we go from seeing
things one way to seeing them another way—the whole
world is remade. All that we "know" is what registers on our
brains, so what you perceive (your individual reality-tunnel)
is made up of nothing but thoughts—as Sir Humphrey Davy
noted when selfexperimenting with nitrous oxide in 1819,
and as Buddha noticed by sitting alone until all his social
imprints atrophied and dropped away.
The Copernican Revolution in astronomy, the Darwinian
revolution in biology, the Relativity and Quantum
revolutions in physics, have all been as shocking to those
who lived through them as the Immortalist Revolution is
today.
You can live in the reality-tunnel imprinted upon you by
environmental accident or you can choose your own. You
can go through brain changes as radically bad as those of
Patty Hearst and Rusty Galley, as transcendentally beautiful
as those of Buddha and Jesus, as epistomologically
revolutionary as those of Darwin and Einstein.
You can join those who have already entered the
Immortalist Reality Tunnel, the Scientologist Reality-Tunnel
or the Communist Reality-Tunnel.
"There are a lot of different realities going around these
days," Abby Hoffman once said. Evolutionary acceleration is
forcing us to the point where each will have to take
responsibility for which reality we accept.
Fifteen million Americans are waiting, trustingly, for the
Space Brothers to come down in their UFOs and enforce
World Peace.
The UFO is the, or an, extreme case. In general, everything
we see is inside our heads.
This is demonstrated by the well-known optical diagram
encountered in every high-school physics class:

1 Presumably the input (software) or the brain (hardware). Or
both.

The light rays from the external object are reflected
through the lens of the eye onto the retina, and reversed in
the process.
The brain obligingly interprets the picture, turning it rightsideup, and editing it in other ways more subtle.
What is true of vision is true of the other senses. What we
know is what registers on the brain. This is the answer to
the famous Zen Buddhist koan (riddle), "Who is the Divine
Being who makes the grass green?"
The brain, in the routine course of the before-mentioned
100,000,000 programs per minute, takes in, edits,
orchestrates, organizes, packages, labels etc. all raw
"existential" experience and classifies it according to the
neurological Dewey Decimal System. This system varies
from society to society; hence, cultural relativism—what is
"real" to the Eskimo is not quite the same as what is "real"
to a New York taxi-driver.

To review: Each individual has a neurological system, or
game, different from other members of the same society.
In accord with Einstein's physical relativism, and
anthropology's cultural relativism, we call this neurological
relativism.
The vegetarian does not "see" (experience) meat on a rack
in the butcher shop the same way the meat-eater sees it.
The racist does not see a member of another race as, say,
that person's parents do. More generally, as the Poet tells
us: "The Fool sees not the same tree that the Wise Man
sees."
Among the many editorial tasks of the brain, performed so
rapidly and smoothly that we do not notice it, is the
classification of the separate quanta of perception into
"inside" and "outside."
That this neat system does not accord with brute fact we
learn from optics and neurology; that it can be abolished
entirely, with great profit in terms of insight, we learn from
the type of metaprogramming experience called dhyana in
the Hindu and Buddhist traditions.
Crowley says of the dhyana experience:
In the course of our concentration we noticed that the
contents of the mind at any moment consisted of two
things, and no more: the (external) Object, variable, and
the (internal) Subject, invariable, or apparently so. By
success in dharana1 the object has been made as invariable
as the subject.
Now the result of this is that the two become one. This
phenomenon usually comes as a tremendous shock.
In our words, "mind" (whatever that is) and its contents are
functionally identical. The usual system of classifying the
contents as "me" (part of "mind") and not-"me" ("outside")
can be abolished—not just by meditation, but by certain
well-known drugs—and the unity of the field of perception is
then recognized.
We become Metaprogrammers.
This is what we might expect from the triumphs of field
theory and general systems theory in sociology,
anthropology, quantum theory etc. It still comes as a
distinct shock when it is experienced not just talked about.
When "I" and "my world" (field of perception) become one,
"I" am transformed utterly, as in "in a refiners' fire," as the
mystics say.
This sounds a bit puzzling to the average person without
experience in brain-change games. Try this illustration:
Assuming you are reading this in your own home, look
around the room.
Note that everything in your field of vision—furniture,
paintings or posters on the walls, stereo set or absence of
same, rugs, TV or not TV, etc.—is, in a sense, your creation
or co-creation. You and/or your spouse or room-mates(s)
selected everything that got into the room. You also
selected or co-selected that particular room, out of the
millions of rooms on this planet where you might otherwise
live. The tunnel-reality of that room, then, in a very real
sense has been "created" or "manifested" by you, out of a
universe of infinite possibilities.
Silent meditation on one object for many weeks, like the Zen
monk with the ox.

Of course, only the most fanatic Freudian or Buddhist
mystic would claim your whole life history has been
similarly "selected" by you. But, stop and think a moment:
the life-history you think you have, the part that is stored in
your brain as "memory," has certainly been selected. You
can't even remember everything that happened in the last
five minutes. If you try to be inwardly silent (passive; nonverbal) and notice everything happening in your field for
one minute, you are overwhelmed by thousands of
impressions that you cannot catalog and retain.
Conclusion: who you are, and what you think you are, is a
creation edited and orchestrated by your brain.
Everybody you meet is an "artist" who has made a similar
creation.
And these creations are, all of them, as diverse and
idiosyncratic as the musical styles of Bach, Beethoven,
Rock, Wagner, Vivaldi, Bizet, Orff, Chopin, John Cage, Soul,
the Beatles, Harry James, Disco, Scotch folk-songs, African
chants...
As for the universe "outside" you: of course, you didn't
create that. But just because you didn 't create it, you can

never know it...except approximately. What you do know,
and consider "the universe outside" is another, part of your
brain, which has made of its circuits a model which you
identify with the universe outside.
These models are as varied and miscellaneous as the
paintings of Botticelli, Rembrandt, Van Gogh, Picasso, Paul
Klee, Wyeth, Dali, Monet...
This the meaning of the notion that mind and its contents
are functionally identical.
Consider the old folk-rhyme:
I saw a man upon the stair,
A little man who wasn't there.
He wasn't there again today;
Gee, I wish he'd go away.
This little man is a semantic spook; he exists only in the
language, and yet once the language has invoked him it
almost seems to make sense to wish he would go away.
Recent advances in semantics, semiotic, linguistic analysis,
foundations of mathematics, logic, etc. have demonstrated
that our conceptual field—our symbolic environment—is
haunted by many such "spooks."
There are Empedoclean paradoxes, of which the classic is:

EVERYTHING IN THIS BOX IS FALSE
Theologians are vexed by questions like: Can an
omnipotent God create a rock so heavy He Himself cannot
lift it? (If he cannot, he is not omnipotent; and if he can, he
is also not omnipotent.)
Philosophers and physicists are still bothered by: what
happened before Time began? Somebody is supposed to
have remarked, "I'm glad I don't like cauliflower, because if
I liked it, I'd eat it, and I hate the stuff." Alice in
Wonderland, and any treatise on mathematical logic, will
provide hundreds of examples of similar mind-benders.
A Zen saying sums it all up:
"To think that I am not going to think of you anymore is
still thinking of you. Let me then try not to think that I am
not going to think of you."
Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead attempted to
resolve all such conundrums with a mathematical
proposition known as the Theory of Types. Unfortunately, it
was quickly pointed out that either (a) the Theory of Types
refers to itself, in which case it limits itself by its own
terms, and does not solve all our semantic problems, or (b)
the Theory of Types does not refer to itself, in which case
there are propositions to which it does not refer, and it is
again limited, and we are left with our problems.
These third-circuit perplexities are of more than technical
logical and philosophical import. Many situations in real life
take the form of our being haunted by our own semantic
spooks. For instance, the popular novel, Catch-22, deals
with a very real Empedoclean knot: the hero can escape
from the war if he can prove his is crazy, but if he attempts
to do this it will prove he is sane, since it is sane to escape
a dangerous situation.
The logic of the dream-world of Finnegans Wake is not so
far from real life, either. A patient, of German birth, at St.
Elizabeth's hospital, would not walk through doors,
explaining "Da fressen mich die Turen." (The doors will eat
me.) This makes perfect sense phonetically, since it is
identical in pronunciation with "Dafressen mich die Tieren. "
(The animals will eat me).
Word-magic? Schizophrenia? The average person, not a
vegetarian, will respond positively to "tender juicy filet
mignon" on the menu; but not to "a piece off of a dead
castrated bull." But the two expressions mean the same
thing.
We all tend to conjugate sentences in the manner
caricatured by Bertrand Russell: "I am firm. You are
obstinate. He is a pigheaded fool." ("I am daring and
original. You are pretentious.
She stinks." "I am flexible. You bend with the wind. They're
a bunch of opportunists.")
The magic of poetry creates "real toads in imaginary
gardens," it has been said. When Robert Burns writes:
The wan moon is setting behind the white wave And Time is
setting with me, oh it is hard not to feel that the abstraction
"time" has become as real as the physical moon and wave—
or the little man upon the stair.

Consider the following table:
COLUMN I
Nigger-loving busy body
Smutty book
Daring and original theory
Sexist enterprise
Woolly-headed liberal
Sound, sensible economics

COLUMN II
Civil libertarian
Realistic novel
Wild and implausible
Speculation
Dealer in rare and exotic art
Passionate humanitarian
Stingy, tight-assed idea

Any phrase in column I can describe persons or events that
might very well be described, by a different speaker, with
the corresponding phrase in column II. Now the reader may
feel that some of the phrases above are so pejorative, so
loaded with prejudice, that only the most ignorant or
bigoted would use them; but that is irrelevant. What needs
to be noted is that it is easy to see the bias in somebody
else's semantic maps, but not so easy to see the bias in
one's own semantic reality-tunnel. If the reader were born
in Arkansas in the 1920s, item 1 in Column I might seem
the natural, accurate, normal way to refer to the first
NAACP worker to appear and try to organized the Blacks.
These matters are symbolic, but more than linguistic. For
example, the proverbial Englishman who dressed for dinner
every night in his lonely tropical hut was no fool. He was
keeping an English third-circuit reality bubble around him,
to avoid becoming engulfed in the reality-bubble of the
natives. See what happens to Kurz in Joseph Conrad's
Heart of Darkness when the African reality-tunnel
overwhelms his European reality-tunnel.
It only takes a few weeks in prison to become "a convict,"
whatever your definition of yourself was before, it only
takes a few weeks in the Army to become a "soldier."
These remarks are another elucidation of our earlier
statement that mind and its contents are functionally
identical. The symbolizing process is such that, once set in
motion, it is virtually impossible (without subtle neurological
know-how) to escape from a reality-tunnel one has created
for oneself or had foisted upon one by the environment.
Kurt Saxon is the author of The Poor Man's James Bond, a
manual that tells you everything you could ever want to
know about practical techniques of murder and mayhem,
The Survivor, a four-volume extension of the same libretto,
telling where to acquire any possible type of weapon, Root
Rot, a diatribe against Alex Haley for implying that slavery
was unfair to Black people, and several similar books. Mr.
Saxon does not get reviewed in the Liberal magazines that
decide which authors are important, but he has a wide
readership among the Apocalyptical sects of the right-wing
end of the political spectrum.
Mr. Saxon wrote in the 1970s that the United States would
be destroyed almost totally by 1982. This is because the
government has driven the "competents" out of business by
excessive taxation and has subsidized 30 million
"incompetents" on Welfare and another 30 million
"incompetents" on Social Security.
This country has thus become, Saxon says, "a Disneyland
for dummies."
By 1982, Saxon said, the whole economy would collapse.
"Millions of taxpayers will be unemployed... Millions who are
now on Valium or other tranquilizers will go insane when
they cannot get more. Drug addicts (will) swarm over
pharmacies looking for dope, ruining everything they don't
steal..." We will be helpless against Russian attack because
"our politicians
have
so devoted
themselves to
nurturing...incompetent
dependents
that
further
industrialization to put our nation on a war footing will be
unaffordable. Even if it were not, our present unionspoiled
and demanding work force cannot be expected to perform
the way our parents did in the war plants of the late 1930s
and early 1940s." The only solution, Saxon informs us, is to
buy farms, order his books on how to kill people efficiently,
and stockpile every type of weaponry, to fight off the
"drooling imbeciles and parasites" who will flee the doomed
cities and try to steal your crops.
Mr. Saxon believed that these are objective predictions
based on hard "laws" of sociology and economics which he
learned from the writings of Ms. Ayn Rand. He did not
believe that this apocalyptical reality tunnel in which he

lives is in any way an artistic creation expressing his own
emotional anxieties and hostilities.
John White believes that the earth will shift on its axis some
time before 1999. There will be "massive loss of life" and
civilization will be almost totally destroyed. The only hope
you have, he says, is to retreat to a farm (a la Mr. Saxon)
where you will probably be wiped out anyway but have
some advantage over city-people in that you won't have tall
buildings falling on you when the Pole Shift sets off
earthquakes everywhere.
Mr. White believes that these are objective predictions
based on eternal "laws" of karma which he learned from
various occultists and gurus. He does not believe that the
apocalyptical reality-tunnel in which he lives is in any way
an artistic creation expressing his own emotional anxieties
and hostilities.
Mr. White also believes that many UFOs are actually
demons, and that after the Pole Shift kills us off, most of us
will go to "Hell," which is not eternal, fortunately, but only
"timeless."
If we confront the world without ideas we see only a
muddle, the formless void that existed before "God"
(intellect) started to create a universe (a system) in
Genesis.
Once we become the "image of God" by making our own
universe, we have a model of the muddle. The model is
very convenient—we could not be human without it—but it
is also very misleading whenever we forget that we have
created it.
None of the reality-models discussed in this chapter,
however bizarre they may seem to some readers, are any
more arbitrary than the official reality-model known as
consensus-reality, which is a statistical average and not
nearly consensual as it seems.
Travel 100 miles in any direction, and the consensus begins
to crumble. Travel 1000 miles and very little consensus is
left...
"The peoples of the earth are islands," said the late
Clement Atlee, "shouting at each other over oceans of
misunderstanding."
Each island is a separate reality-tunnel created by (a) our
culture, (b) our sub-culture and (c) by the myth-maker or
artist in each of us who is the adamantine individuality that
makes you and me unique human selves not replicable
units like the ants in a hive.
Robert Anton Wilson is the author of Cosmic Trigger,
Schrodinger's Cat, Sex & Drugs and several other books.
Like Mr. Saxon and Mr. White, Wilson does not get reviewed
in the Liberal magazines that decide which authors are
important, but he has a wide readership among sciencefiction fans, political Libertarians and veterans of the
Consciousness Revolution.
Wilson believes that life extension techniques and
intelligence raising drugs will be discovered in this decade,
and will be widely available by 2010. Less radical than Dr.
Silverstein, Wilson does not expect immortality to be
achieved until the middle of the next century—but he
expects life-extension drugs will keep him around until
then.
Wilson expects most of humanity will have migrated off
Earth into space cities by 2028. He expects that with higher
intelligence and longer lives than past humanity, these
postterrestrials will gradually become Superhuman by
comparison with our historical average.
Wilson believes that these are good guesses based on
scientific probabilities, but he does not think there are any
hard economic or karmic laws guaranteeing them. He
recognizes that this reality-tunnel was generated by his
own brain, that he is the artist who created it, and that it
expresses his own hopes and desires, as well as scientific
probabilities. It is, he knows, the reality-tunnel that keeps
him happy, creative, busy and full of zest for life.
He doesn't think it is any crazier than anybody else's
realitytunnel, and he claims it is a lot more fun than any
other.
EXERCISES
1 . Using the four circuit model, try to guess which specific
imprints created Mr. Saxon's reality-tunnel.
2. Apply the same analysis to Mr. White and Mr. Wilson.

3. Apply the same analysis to Jesus, Hitler, Walt Whitman
and your own father and mother.
4. Write a criticism of this chapter from the viewpoint of
Christian Fundamentalism.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
THE SNAFU PRINCIPLE
...the peculiar nature of the game...makes it impossible for
[participants] to stop the game once it is under way. Such
situations we label games without end.
— Watzlawick, Beavin, Jackson, Pragmatics of Human
Communication

COMMUNICATION IS ONLY POSSIBLE
EQUALS DOMINANCE "HERRENMORAL"

BETWEEN

DOMINANCE
“HERRENMORAL”

This is second-circuit neuro-politics.
They shall come to know good.
—James Joyce, Finnegans Wake
Mammalian sociobiology, rooted in the antique neural
circuits of the old brain, contains many factors opposing the
evolution of domesticated primates into true freedom and
objective intelligence.
The chief of these "reactionary" factors was described in my
novel Illuminatus! as the Snafu Principle or Celine's Law. It
holds that communication is only possible between equals.
This was an over-simplification for fictional (satirical)
purposes.
More precisely, this proposed "law" would read:
Adequate communication flows freely between equals.
Communication between non-equals is warped and
distorted by second-circuit Domination and Submission
rituals perpetuating communication jam and a Game
Without End.

Political power, as a typical alpha male once said, grows out
of the barrel of a gun. This is metaphorically as well as
literally true. The "gun" may be symbolic and fairly
abstract, consisting of ritualized social expectations ("Don't
talk back to your father") or concrete in a non-violent but
deadly way, e.g., the capacity to remove bio-survival
necessities by cutting off the ticket supply in a Capitalist
society ("One more word and I'll fire you, Bumstead!").
Under the primate second-circuit socio-biological rules,
everybody tends to lie a little, to flatter or to evade
displeasure, when exchanging signals with those above
them in the packhierarchy.
Every authoritarian structure can be visualized as a pyramid
with an eye on the top. This is the typical flow-chart of any
government, any corporation, any Army, any bureaucracy,
any mammalian pack. On each rung, participants bear a
burden of nescience in relation to those above them. That
is, they must be very, very careful that the natural sensory
activities of being conscious organisms—the acts of seeing,
hearing, smelling, drawing inferences from perception,
etc.—are in accord with the reality-tunnel of those above
them. This is absolutely vital; pack status (and "job
security") depends on it. It is much less important—a
luxury that can easily be discarded—that these perceptions
be in accord with objective fact.
For instance, in the FBI under J. Edgar Hoover, the agent
had to develop a capacity to see godless communists
everywhere.
Any agent whose perceptions indicated that there were
actually very few godless communists in this country at that
time would experience cognitive dissonance—his or her
reality-tunnel was at variance with the "official" realitytunnel of the pyramid. To talk about such perceptions at all
would be to invite suspicions of eccentricity, intellectual
wiseacreing or of being oneself a godless communist.
The same would apply to a Dominican inquisitor in the
middle ages who lacked the capacity to "see" witches
everywhere. In such authoritarian situations, it is important
to see what the Top Dogs (alpha males) see; it is
inconvenient, and possibly dangerous to see what is
objectively happening.
But this leads to an equal and opposite burden of
omniscience upon those at the top, in the eye of the
pyramid. All that is forbidden to those at the bottom—the
conscious activities of perception and evaluation—is
demanded of the Power Elite, the master class. They must
attempt to do the seeing, hearing, smelling, etc. and all the
thinking and evaluating for the whole pyramid.
But a man with a gun (the power to punish) is told only
what the target thinks will not cause him to pull the trigger
(write the pink slip, order the court-martial). The elite, with
their burden of omniscience, face the underlings, with their
burden of nescience, and receive only the feedback
consistent with their own preconceived notions and realitytunnels. The burden of omniscience becomes, over time,
another and more complex burden of nescience. Nobody
really knows anything anymore, or if they do, they are
careful to hide the fact. The burden of nescience becomes
omnipresent. More and more of sensory experience
becomes unspeakable.
As Paul Watzlawick notes, that which is objectively
repressed (unspeakable) soon becomes subjectively
repressed (unthinkable).
Nobody likes to feel like a coward and a liar constantly. It is
easier to cease to notice where the official tunnel-reality
differs from existential fact. Thus SNAFU accelerates and
rigiditus bureaucraticus sets in—the last stage before all
brain activity ceases and the pyramid is clinically dead as
an intellectual entity.
We also propose that "national security" is another
semantic spook, an Empedoclean knot; that the search for
national security is the chief cause of national insecurity
and a potent anti-intelligence mechanism.
As Leary writes:
Secrecy is the original sin. Fig leaf in the Garden of Eden.
The basic crime against love... The purpose of life is to
receive, synthesize and transmit energy. Communication
fusion is the goal of life. Any star can tell you that.
Communication is love.

Secrecy, withholding the signal, hoarding, hiding, covering
up the light is motivated by shame and fear.
As so often happens, the right wing is half right for the
wrong reasons. They say primly: if you have done nothing
wrong, you have no fear of being bugged. Exactly. But the
logic goes both ways. Then FBI files, CIA dossiers, White
House conversations should be open to all. Let everything
hang open. Let government be totally visible. The last, the
very last people to hide their actions should be the police
and the government.
What my eminent colleague states so poetically can be
stated more functionally as follows:
Every secret police agency must be monitored by an elite
corps or secret-police-of-the-second-order. This is because
(a) infiltration of the secret police, for purposes of
subversion, will always be a prime goal of both internal
subversives and hostile foreign powers and (b) secret police
agencies acquire fantastic capacities to blackmail and
intimidate others, in and out of government. Stalin
executed three chiefs of the secret police in a row because
of this danger. As Nixon so wistfully said in a Watergate
transcript, Well, Hoover performed. He would have fought.
That was the point. He would have defied a few people. He
would have scared them to death. He had a file on
everybody. [Italics added.]
Thus, those who employ secret police agencies must
monitor them, to be sure they are not acquiring too much
power.
Here a sinister infinite regress enters the game. Any elite
second order police must be, also, subject to infiltration, or
to acquiring "too much power" in the opinion of its masters.
And so it, too, must be monitored, by a secret-police-ofthe-third-order.
In brief, once a government has n orders of secret police
spying on each other, all are potentially suspect, and to be
safe, a secret police of order n plus 1 must be created. And
so on, forever.
In practice, of course, this cannot regress to mathematical
infinity, but only to the point where every citizen is spying
on every other citizen or until the funding runs out.
National Security, in practice, must always fall short of the
logically Empedoclean infinite regress it requires for perfect
"security." In that gap between the ideal of "One Nation
under surveillance with wire taps and urine tests for all,"
and the strictly limited real situation of finite resources and
finite funding, there is ample encouragement for paranoias
of all sorts to flourish, both among the citizens and among
the police.

If there is a secret police at all, in any nation, every branch
and department of government, and institutions which are
not even admitted to be parts of government, becomes
suspect in the eves of cautious and intelligent people as a
possible front for, or tunnel to, the secret police. That is,
the more shrewd will recognize that something bearing the
label of HEW or even International Silicon and Pencil might
actually be the CIA or NSA in disguise.
In such a deception network, conspiracy theories
proliferate.
Rumor is necessary, it has been found, when people cannot
find "official" news sources that can be trusted to tell them
what is really going on. The present author, having worked
in the civil rights movement, the anti-war movement, the
legalize-pot movement and other dissident causes, has
repeatedly been approached by friend A with dire warnings
that friend B is almost certainly a secret police agent, only
to be told later and independently by friend C that friend A
is a secret police agent.
It requires delicate neurological know-how to keep one's
sense of humor in the secret police matrix.
The more omnipresent the secret police, the more likely it
is that intelligent men and women will regard the
government with fear and loathing.
The government, on discovering that growing numbers of
citizens regard it with fear and loathing, will increase the
size and powers of the secret police, to protect itself.
The infinite regress again appears.

THE BURDEN OF OMNISCIENCE
or: Why you can't reach the Court
or the Castle in Kafka's allegories

SUSPICION LEADS TO MORE SUSPICION

Thus, the USSR after 62 years of Marxist secret police
games reached the point where the alpha males were
terrified of painters and poets.
In spying-and-hiding transactions, worry leads to more
worry and suspicion leads to more suspicion. The very act
of participating, however unwillingly, in the secret police
game—even as victim, or citizen being monitored—will
eventually produce all the classic symptoms of clinical
paranoia.
The agent knows who he is spying on, hut he never knows
who is spying on him. Could it be his wife, his mistress, his
secretary, the newsboy, the Good Humor man?

The only alternative was suggested sarcastically by
playwright Bertolt Brecht (who was hounded by U.S. secret
police as a communist and by East German secret police,
later, as not sufficiently communist). "If the government
doesn't trust the people," Brecht asked innocently, "why
doesn't it dissolve them and elect a new people?" No way
has yet been invented to elect a new people, so the
government will instead spy on the existing people with
increased vigor.
Every secret police organization is engaged in both the
collection
of
information
and
the
production
of
misinformation, euphemistically called "disinformation."

That is, you score points in the secret police game both by
hoarding signals (information units)—hiding facts from
competitors—and by foisting false signals (fake information
units) on the other players. This creates the situation I call
Optimum SNAFU, in which every player has rational (not
neurotic) reasons for suspecting that each and all may be
trying to deceive him, gull him, con him, dupe him and
generally misinform him. As Henry Kissinger is alleged to
have said, anybody in Washington who isn't paranoid must
be crazy.
Maybe the UFOs really exist objectively—or maybe the
whole UFO phenomenon is a cover for a secret police
disinformation ploy. Maybe there are Black Holes where
space and time implode—or maybe Black Holes were
invented to befuddle Russian scientists and send them into
"little man who wasn't there" semantic spookery. Maybe
Jimmy Carter really exists—or maybe he is, as National
Lampoon once claimed, an actor named Sidney Goldfarb
trained to project an attractive down-home "image."
Perhaps only three alpha males at the top of the National
Security pyramid really know the answers to these
questions—or perhaps these three are being deceived by
certain subordinates, as Lyndon Johnson was deceived
about Vietnam by the CIA.
Such is the neuro-sociological "logic" of a Disinformation
Matrix. It is, as Paul Watzlawik has demonstrated, the logic
of schizophrenia.
Less than ten years after the secret police game was
established here by the National Security Act of 1948, the
books of Dr. Wilhelm Reich were burned in a New York
incinerator by government order. This was a shocking sight
to some of us, who remembered that we had recently
fought a long war against Nazi Germany for, among other
things, their crime "against civilization" of burning books.
Shortly thereafter, Dr. William Ivy, former head of a
department at Chicago Medical School, was subjected to
ten years of legal harassment for espousing a radical cancer
cure. More recently, Dr. Timothy Leary was sentenced to 38
years imprisonment for espousing controversial ideas about
neurotransmitter chemicals and reimprinting the nervous
system.
Now there is a war on against holistic physicians.
It does not matter whether any or all of these "heretics"
were right or wrong. Scientific truth is only determined
after a generation or more of research; it is not determined
by throwing the dissenters in prison or burning their books.
The point is that the secret police game immediately
creates the social context for a return to the mechanisms of
the Holy Inquisition.
The intelligence of the whole society—the communication
networks through which information is received, decoded
and transmitted—is the first casualty.
"I feel great and I send fraternal greetings to Dr. Andrei
Sakharov in Russia," said Dr. Leary on emerging from
prison, registering the fact that the mechanisms of the
police state are the same everywhere, as are the myths
that protect them. "Good Russians" believed Dr. Sakharov
was a half-crazed alcoholic, just as "Good Americans"
believed Dr. Leary was a half-crazed dope-fiend.
I once proposed in a magazine article that the UFO is
caused by some unusual electromagnetic or gravitational
field fluctuation; and that this geophysical anomaly creates
(a) real energy disturbances—jumping furniture, electrical
failures, ball-lightning making odd lights in the sky, etc. and
(b) disturbance in the brain functioning of animals and
humans in the afflicted area, causing the well-documented
animal panics and the rather obvious human hallucinations
occurring in such areas.
Statistical support for this theory will be found in Persinger
and Lafreniere who have run computer-analyses of common
patterns in 1,242 UFO cases and 4,818 other "abnormal"
reports —"poltergeists," "teleportations," "miracles" and
"mysteries" of all sorts. This data demonstrates that both
UFOs and other energy anomalies tend to cluster along
earthquake faults with some peaking before earthquakes.
Persinger and Lafreniere also suggest that the geophysical
forces at work create both real oddities (jumping furniture,
etc.) and hallucinations, so that it is a job of nice and
exquisite discrimination to attempt to find out what was
really going on.

It has also been proposed, by the learned Dr. Jacques
Vallee, astronomer, cyberneticist and physicist, that the
UFO phenomenon is being created by a secret police agency
as an elaborate "cover" for a complex disinformation
system.
A combined Wilson-Persinger-Lafreniere-Vallee theory,
probably fitting more of the data than the separate
theories, would suggest that the UFO phenomenon is the
synergetic product of some geophysical oddity which
created weird energy fluctuations and brain-change
experiences in humans on the scene, and is being
manipulated after the fact by one or more "intelligence"
agencies, or by groups even more esoteric.
Consider this scenario:
Something weird happens. Assume that it is the
geophysical abnormality and brain-change trauma we posit,
but grant also that it might be the alien spaceship beloved
by folk-myth. The following events are equally likely,
whatever the weirdity "really was."
As soon as the witnesses start talking, All Interested Parties
converge on the area. Intelligence Agent Moe comes to
conceal evidence that it might have been a spaceship—that
is the policy of his agency, for their own reasons.
Intelligence Agent Joe also arrives to plant evidence that it
was a spaceship—that is the policy of his agency, since they
are doing just what Dr. Vallee suspects. (The British Double
Cross Bureau, in World War II, engaged in equally complex
and absurdist dramas, seemingly totally unrelated to their
actual work, but serving as disinformation screens for that
work.) Philip Klass and other Skeptics arrive, too, trying to
reduce everything to "hallucination," even if eyes are
burned, cars wrecked, etc. The Space Freaks, who may or
may not be infiltrated by associates of Intelligence Agent
Joe, are soon there, too, to get the facts to fit their Benign
Space Brothers reality-tunnel. Various occultists are there,
too, to fit it all into their own mythos of angelology,
demonology, etc.
What we are saying is that every conspiracy regards itself
as an affinity group—men and women who share the same
goals and work together well. When you and I do it, it is
just an affinity group. When that gang over there does it, it
is a damnable conspiracy.
True conspiracy does exist when a group conceals evidence,
spreads deliberate misinformation and coerces or terrorizes
witnesses.
Any affinity group approaches such behavior to the extent
that members reinforce each other's participation in the
group reality-tunnel, especially concerning such crucial
epistemological matters as what is important enough to
notice and discuss as against what is trivial and better
ignored. How coercive do we have to be to intimidate
witnesses? Most people, as our Snafu Principle explains, are
easily led to reporting what an Authority Figure wants to
hear.
But let us consider the UFO syndrome further, as
illustrating the whole spectrum of brain-change, and brainprogramming.
UFO contactees frequently show positive neurosomatic turn
on, the bliss-out experience; some even become faithhealers or leaders of occultist groups. Others show negative
neurosomatic
effects—light
is
unbearable,
'as
in
schizophrenia, anxiety attacks may require hospitalization,
etc.
Meta-programming consciousness (the ability to choose
between alternative reality-tunnels) is also reported, in
crude metaphors about "parallel universes," "other
realities," occultish jargon.
Neurogenetic (Jungian "collective unconscious") visions are
common, ranging from demons, hairy dwarfs etc. to the
Space Goddess or Lady of the Stars of ancient and Catholic
iconography.
Even meta-physiological (quantum-level) experience is
reported in the UFO literature, ranging from trans-time trips
and "out-of-body experiences" to seeming, or alleged,
teleportations.
It must be emphasized most strongly that both positive and
negative visions on all these circuits are common in
UFOlogy. It seems that if the Programmers mean us well,
they are accidentally doing ill to many: and if they mean us

ill, as Dr. Vallee thinks, they are accidentally doing well to
some of us. But this is true of all brain-change technology.
It seems that Vallee's monistic conspiracy theory is
inadequate, as monistic conspiracy theories are inadequate
in politics.
It is more likely that the UFO experience, like the other
brainchange experiences we have studied, are sometimes
spontaneous and sometimes programmed; and that there
are rival gangs of programmers with radically different
goals in mind for humanity.
When Dr. Leary and I first published a neurological analysis
of the Patty Hearst case in OUI magazine, the editors
introduced it with a dramatic headline:
The fight for Patty Hearst's mind is the overture to a
worldwide battle for the control of consciousness.
Not quite. The Hearst case would more appropriately be
considered a bar near the end of the second movement of
the Mind War symphony. The first movement was the
primitive neuroscience of ancient and medieval tyrants who
acquired a great deal of pragmatic know-how about the
effects of isolation, terror and intimidation; and of shamans
and occultists who learned how neuro-chemicals can alter
perceived reality-tunnels. The second movement began
with modern psychology, with Freud, Pavlov, Jung, Skinner
etc., climaxing with the LSD revolution and the discovery by
millions that reality-tunnels could be radically mutated—
temporarily
and
sometimes
permanently—by
neurochemistry.
The third movement is the growingly obvious warfare
between those who would program all of us, and those of
us who wish to become our own Metaprogrammers.
EXERCISES
1. Start collecting evidence that your phone is bugged.
2. Everybody gets a letter occasionally that is slightly
damaged.
Assume that somebody is opening your mail and clumsily
resealing it.
3. Look around for evidence that your co-workers or
neighbors think you're a bit queer and are planning to have
you committed to a mental hospital.
4. Try living a whole week with the program, "Everybody
likes me and tries to help me achieve all of my goals."
5. Try living a whole month with the program, "I have
chosen to be aware of this particular reality."
6. Try living a day with the program "I am God playing at
being a human being. I created every reality I notice."
Assume that "GOD" is the answer to Da Free John's
question, "Who is the one who is living you now?"
7. Try living forever with the metaprogram, "Everything
works out more perfectly than I plan it."

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
QUANTUM EVOLUTION
What is man? A bridge between the
Superman—a bridge over an abyss.
— F.W. Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra

ape

and

the

Another perspective on domesticated primate evolution is
provided by Alvin Toffler's The Third Wave.
For convenience Toffler reduces the muddle of human
history into a model of three waves. It would be more
accurate to refer to these "waves" as quantum jumps in
energy-coherence level.
The First Wave, Toffler says, took millennia to occur, but it
finally transformed the larger part of humanity from the
tribal stage (simple hunting-gathering primates) to the
stage of largescale agricultural-feudal civilizations.

The Second Wave came much faster and, in a few
centuries, transformed almost all of humanity from feudalagricultural cottage economy to industrial-urban-market
economy.
The Third Wave, Toffler says, continues the trend toward
acceleration and will happen in only a few decades. We call
it "the information explosion," "the post industrial
economy," etc.
Each wave is faster, by a factor of 10, than the previous
wave.
And each wave is more total in that it changes more people,
changes them more completely, and in the process
transforms our concept of human nature and human
society.
Each wave that Toffler describes can be considered a new
quantum state, with energy levels and reality-dimensions
lacking in the previous state and totally unpredictable from
the previous state.
The First Wave mutated tribal men and women into serfs
(or into Lords and Ladies). It created a whole new social
manifold that is so subtle and pervasive that
anthropologists and sociologists can spend years studying
its invisible aspects. And yet this transformation is so
enormous that it is also visible to the most untrained eyes:
you can't confuse a tribal human with a feudal human
anymore than you can confuse a dog with a donkey.
So, too, the Second Wave created what Toffler wittily calls
"indust-reality," manifesting as industrial men and women
who are visibly, tangibly, as different from feudal or tribal
humans as dolphins are from rose bushes or armadillos.
The Third Wave, which began when Shannon and Wiener
defined information and Von Neumann designed the first
programmable computer, is well under way already. Home
computers became as common as TV sets by the mid1980s. Now the Net—computers "talking to" computers—is
doubling every four months. This transformation, again, will
be total: it will create a whole new "man," a new "woman,"
a new "child," a new "self," new "society," a new concept of
"work" and "energy" and "reality," etc.
The average Man or Woman of 1997 will be as obsolete in
2007 as the medieval serf is now. What we consider normal
jobs, normal social roles; normal "humanity" will be as
archaic as a horde of alchemists, smithies, Town Criers,
courtiers and barbersurgeons arriving in our midst today.
Of course, Toffler does not claim that the computer is the
whole of the Third Wave, but merely that it is the
synecdoche or paradigm of what is happening. In this
sense, the factory was the synecdoche of the Second Wave.
It was not merely the agent by which "indust-reality"
spread across the world and multiplied our collective wealth
(and illth); it also became the model for everything else.
Our schools are mini-factories or models of factories
because their main job was, when they were founded, to
prepare people for factory work. The schools, in fact, were
necessary because, while feudalism does not require
literacy of the masses, industrialism does. Similarly, offices
were modeled on factories, and kept factory-hours, even
when this had little or nothing to do with how ,.the offices
could most efficiently be managed. And in general, "industreality," the reality of the industrial age, moved everybody
into the robot lockstep of the factory system.l
"Indust-reality" is still so pervasive that it is, as McLuhan
noted, mostly invisible. For instance, the feudal age never
progressed beyond chamber music—trios, quartets etc. The
modern symphony, with its huge orchestra, its Promethean
themes, its god-like conductor ("capitalist"), its concertmaster (foreman), its string section moving in harmony
with its brass section, etc. is a beautiful artistic expression
of modes of mass
A free-lance writer can obviously work any hours, but the very
successful (and very excellent) John D. MacDonald said in a
recent interview that he always writes from nine to five,
because it seems "natural" to him. The factory time-clock has
gotten into Mac- Donald's neurons. The present author, after 20
years in factory-like offices works any hours of the day or night
when "the spirit" moves him, but never starts at nine or stops
at five, to avoid relapsing into the habits of his past.

human organization appearing usually in less beautiful
forms in the factory assembly-line. (The factory also
demanded cities— massive concentrations of labor in one

place—which made the symphony economically possible.
The aristocrat could not afford, and/or could not conceive,
keeping more than the very few musicians necessary for
chamber music.)
Beethoven's "cosmic optimism" not only expresses the Age
of Reason out of which indust-reality emerged; the very
orchestras he wrote for were paradigms of industrial styles
of organization.
Of course, industrialism (the Second Wave) produced much
illth along with its new wealth; and most of the wealth was
ex (or ap)-propriated by a minority. However much this
may pain socialists, it was inevitable in a domesticated
primate species. A few alpha males can always see their
own advantage more clearly than the majority can see their
collective interest.
Nonetheless, as indust-reality has spread, socialism has
followed in its wake. Whether the reader likes this or not
(and the author, being up-front about his prejudices,
admits that he does not like it), this also is inevitable. When
huge wealth is palpably being created in vaster
accumulations than ever before in history, there is sure to
be increased grumbling against the alpha males, and more
attempts to seize what they have selfishly ap- (or
expropriated. Even among baboons this pattern has been
observed: the alpha male who is too obnoxious gets beaten
up by a coalition of younger males and thrown out of the
pack to forage alone.
Neither capitalist indust-reality nor socialist indust-reality
have been able to give humanity what most of us really
want:
liberty and justice, freedom and the abolition of poverty,
continued growth and continued security. In looking at
capitalism vs. socialism, we are always confronted with a
dilemma, not a choice.
The Third Wave can, and will, transcend this problem within
industrialism. The Third Wave will be neither capitalist nor
socialist, nor some milkwater blend of the two. It will
demand a whole new economy, just as feudalism created
an economy unknown to tribal humanity and industrialism
created the two competing economies of capitalism and
socialism, both unguessed and unpredictable from the
perspective of the feudal stage.
In 1977, Dr. Ilya Prigogine won the Nobel prize in physical
chemistry.
Perhaps he should have won a Nobel prize for intelligent
optimism.
Dr. Prigogine 's work deals with the processes we have
been discussing — the emergence of negative entropy
(coherent order) out of stochastic processes — but he has
taken a giant leap beyond the pioneering insights of
Schrodinger, Weiner, Shannon and Bateson.
Any organized system, according to Prigogine, exists in
dynamic tension between entropy and negentropy, between
chaos and information. The more complex the system, the
greater is its instability. Prigogine demonstrated this
mathematically, but in everyday terms, what he means is
that, for instance, it is easier to lead two children through a
department store than twenty children. Or: A toothpick
"house" of 101 pieces is less stable than a smaller toothpick
"house" of 10 pieces.
Instability is not always bad: in fact, it is absolutely
necessary for evolution to occur. Inse'ct societies are highly
stable and have not evolved at all in several million years.
Human societies are highly unstable and are in continuous
evolution.
Prigogine demonstrates the evolutionary value of instability
by his concept of the " dissipative structure. "
A dissipative structure is highly complex and therefore
highly unstable. The more complex it is, the more unstable
it is, mathematically, certain/v; and the more unstable, the
more likely it is to change — to evolve.
All dissipative structures are teetering, perpetually,
between self-destruction and re-organization on a higher
level of information (coherence).
If that sounds grim, it isn't really. Prigogine's math is highly
optimistic, He shows that the more complex structures —
such as our world-round human society today, midway
between Second Wave indust-reality and the emerging
Third Wave — are mathematically more likely, much more

likely, to "dissipate" into higher coherence than into selfdestruction.
In other words, in the intellectual conflict between Utopians
and Dystopians, the mathematical odds actually are on the
side of Utopians. Our human world is so information-rich
(coherent) that it is almost certain to "collapse" into even
higher coherence, not into chaos and self-destruction.
Prigogine is the mathematical demonstration of McLuhan's
intuition that many seeming symptoms of breakdown are
actually harbingers of breakthrough.
A note to confirmed pessimists: Prigogine's analysis is
based on probability-theory and, hence, is not certain.
Thus, if you have found these lyrical pages unduly
alarming, take comfort in the thought that, although human
success is highly probable, there is still a small chance that
we can blow ourselves up or that your favorite apocalyptic
scenarios might still occur, despite the general trend toward
higher coherence and higher intelligence.
Meanwhile, of course, even if humanity seems condemned
to overall success, you can still mess up your personal life.
Nothing in this book is an attempt to prevent the really
resolute miseryaddicts from continuing their pursuit of
frustration and failure.
The latest cosmological evidence indicates that our sun and
its planets, including Earth, condensed out of a cloud of
galactic dust and gas about five or six billion years ago.
It appears that the first forms of unicellular life—the first
dawnings of Circuit I bio-survival "consciousness"—
appeared about 3.4 billion years ago.
Vertebrates began to appear—with Circuit II emotionalterritorial consciousness—about 0.5 billion years ago (500
million years ago).
The emergence of Circuit III human intelligence—language
and "thought"—seems to have begun about 100,000 years
ago.
The fully human domesticated primate, Homo Sapiens, with
Circuit IV "moral" consciousness may be about 30 thousand
years old, or even more recent. Circuits V-VIII have
appeared within historical times.
All of these figures are subject to revision as science
advances, but the rough proportions between them are not
likely to be changed much, and these proportions are
staggering.
As has often been pointed out, if we condense this
evolutionary scenario into a 24-hour day, beginning at
midnight, life itself does not appear until a little before
noon, and all of human history (from the grunting, clubwielding ape men of Africa to Neil Armstrong setting foot on
the moon) occurs in the last half of the last second before
midnight strikes again and the day ends.
This model is misleading in that it assumes the present is
an "end," which is highly unlikely. Even without Space
Migration, the life span of earth's biosphere is expected to
be somewhere between 10 and 15 billion years more,
before the Sun ceases to support life here. Taking the Sun's
expected life span of about 20 billion years as our model to
be mapped onto a single day, we find that it's now around
eight in the morning. Life has been mostly unconscious until
now—operating on auto-pilot, as it were—but in the last
million years (the last few seconds on this model) signs of
consciousness and Awakening are beginning to appear.
"The universe is so constructed as to be able to see itself,"
Spencer Brown once noted. The emergence of the
neurosomatic, neurogenetic and meta-programming circuits
is the universe's way of "seeing itself ever more clearly and
totally, to decide where it is going.
Dr. Isaac Asimov notes1 in his Genetic Code that there
seems to be a 60-year cycle between the first
understanding of a new scientific principle and the
transformation of the world by that principle.
For
instance,
Oersted
discovered
electromagnetic
equivalence— the fact that electricity can be converted to
magnetism, and magnetism to electricity—in 1820. Sixty
years later, in 1880, electrical generators were in wide use
and the Industrial Revolution had peaked; the telegraph
and telephone were already invented, and our age of Mass
Communication was dawning.
Similarly, in 1883, Thomas Edison first noted the so-called
"Edison effect"—the key to electronic, as distinct from
electrical, engineering. 60 years later, in 1943, electronic

technology was appearing everywhere; its primitive form in
the entertainment sphere, radio, had enjoyed a 20-year
triumph and was about to be phased out by television.
In 1896, Becquerel noted the radioactivity of uranium. Sixty
years later, two cities had been destroyed by atomic bombs
and nuclear plants were beginning to be built. (This was a
contribution to illth, not wealth.)
In 1903, the Wright Brothers got their monoplane off the
ground for a few minutes. Sixty years later, in 1963,
jetliners carrying over 100 passengers were normal.
Assuming, gambling, guesstimating that this 60-year cycle
is normal, we can predict:
Shannon and Weiner created the mathematical foundations
of cybernetics in 1948. Sixty years later, in 2008,
cybernetization of the world, as complete as the
electrification of the 19th Century, will have jumped us to a
new energy-level, a new social reality, as Toffler predicts.
Hoffman discovered LSD and the chemical control of
consciousness in 1943. Sixty years later, in 2003, every
alteration in consciousness imaginable will be possible by
ingesting the proper chemicals.
McKay had the first success in expanding life-span of
laboratory rats in 1938. Sixty years later, in 1998, longevity
pills may be routinely available in all drugstores.
DNA was identified in 1944. Sixty years later, in 2004,
every type of genetic engineering should be as routine as
electronic engineering is today.
The latest attempt to estimate the rate of information
acceleration— the manifestation of coherence—was made
by French economist Georges Anderla for the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) in
1973.
Anderla arbitrarily assumed that all the bits of information
possessed by humanity at the beginning of the Christian
Era (1 AD) could be considered his unit of measurement. He
made that information pool one unit in our fund of
knowledge.
It took until 1500 AD, Anderla discovered, for the
accumulation of bits of information to add up to two units in
our "fund."
It required only 250 years more (to 1750) for our bank of
knowledge to double again, to four units.
The next doubling took 150 years and by 1900 humanity
had 8 units in its information capital account.
The next doubling took only 50 years and by 1950 we had
16 units.
The next doubling took only 10 years and by 1960 we had
32 units.
The next doubling took seven years and by 1967 we had 64
units. (This was coincidentally the height of the first Youth
Revolution, when reality maps began breaking down
everywhere on the planet and wild new maps were hurtling
at us from all directions.)

THE INFORMATION EXPLOSION
In the next six year period (1967-1973), our intellectual
bank account again doubled, to 128 units. At this point,
Anderla completed his study.
Dr. Alvin Silverstein has estimated that, if Anderla's graph
is projected ahead seventy years human knowledge should

increase a million/old. That is, we should have 128,000,000
times more knowledge than we had in the year of Jesus'
birth.
Longevity drugs will probably arrive in time for you to live
through the biggest evolutionary quantum jump of all.
It is only reasonable to assume that the higher circuits of
the nervous system—neurosomatic holistic awareness,
neurogenetic
evolutionary
vision,
meta-programming
flexibility—are developing to allow us to cope with this
deluge of higher information and potential higher
coherence.
Toffler's Third Wave is only the sociological aspect of a
mutation that is also biological and "spiritual."
We are going to live a lot longer than we have expected,
and we are going to get a lot smarter.
A whole new reality will emerge from those mutations.
EXERCISES
1. Make a list of ten areas in which your thinking-feeling is
conservative. Guess how soon the world will change so
totally that those ideas will seem not merely conservative
but irrelevant (as the theological debates of 300 AD now
seem irrelevant).
2. Make a list of ten areas in which your conceptualizing is
radical. Guess how soon the world will change so totally
that you will seem conservative in those areas.
3. Accept the longevity hypothesis. Imagine you are going
to live at least 300 years. How much of that time do you
want to spend loafing? How many different jobs would you
like to work at? How many sports, arts or sciences you
never had time for, would you then find the time to enjoy?

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
THE NON-LOCAL QUANTUM CIRCUIT
The ways of the Creator are not our ways, Mr. Deasy said.
All history moves toward one great goal, the manifestation
of God.
— James Joyce, Ulysses

A domesticated primate philosopher on an oxygensupported carbon based planet circling a Type G star—
namely, the present author—was once asked, "How do we
think?"
"Well, we have a built-in bio-survival circuit which
distinguishes nourishment-giving Things from predatory
Things..."
"But can that circuit do all our thinking?"
"Well, no, but then there's an emotional-territorial circuit..."
"But, but, but—"
"It's circuits-circuits-circuits all the way," I said.
What the Thinker thinks, the Prover proves.
We have made a beautiful (we hope beautiful) model of
consciousness in terms of brain hardware and software.
Now we need to remember again that, while the brain can
be modeled by a computer, the model is never the whole
system. The modelmaker or metaprogrammer is bigger
than the model or program.
In what are called "out of body experiences" (OOBEs) by
parapsychologists, awareness seems to escape the confines
of the nervous system entirely.
Such experiences are routinely triggered by advanced yoga
practice, and they also occur spontaneously during what is
called "near-death" or "clinical death" in which the patient
appears to die, by all medical standards, but is revived by
modern resuscitation techniques.
OOBEs also occur with heavy does of LSD and with
ketamine, an anesthetic with strange psychedelic side-

effects. They are also reported in shamanic traditions all
over the world and by many "occultists" in our own society.
Example: One day in 1973, during a neuro-programming
experiment, I "saw" something happening to my son at
exactly that time in Arizona, over 500 miles away.
We can process this datum in various ways. We can say
that my "astral body" actually traveled to Arizona; this is
the occultist theory. We can more conservatively say that I
developed extrasensory perception and "saw" Arizona
without "going" there; there are many parapsychologists
who prefer this third-circuit map of the Sth-Circuit
experience. We can try to aver that I only "happened" to
think of that scene while it was happening, by
synchronicity; this is the Jungian approach. Or we can
sweep it under the carpet by muttering "mere coincidence"
or "sheer coincidence;" which is the traditional Rationalist
approach.
We prefer to say, in accord with earlier writings of Timothy
Leary and the present author and the speculations of the
Physics/ Consciousness Research Group in San Francisco
that such cases illustrate a special working of what is called
in quantum mechanics Bell's Theorem.
Bell's Theorem is highly technical, but in ordinary language
it amounts to something like this: There are no isolated
systems:
every particle in the universe is in "instantaneous" (fasterthanlight) communication with every other particle. The
Whole System, even the parts that are separated by cosmic
distances, functions as a Whole System.
Now, such faster-than-light communication seems to be
forbidden by Special Relativity, which makes a problem.
Bell's Theorem, however, is inescapable: a theorem in
physics is not a mere "theory"; it is a mathematical
demonstration which must be true, if the mathematics
contains no flaw, and if the experiments on which it is
based are replicable. Bell's Theorem contains no
mathematical flaw, and the experiments are replicable and
have been replicated several times.
And yet we cannot dispense with Special Relativity either,
because the mathematics there is equally flawless and the
experiments are legion that confirm it.
Two solutions have been proposed and both assume that
the "communication" involved in Bellian transmissions does
not involve energy, since it is energy that cannot move
faster than light. Dr. Edward Harris Walker suggests that
what does move faster than light, and holds the Whole
System together, is "consciousness."
We may eventually be forced to accept this, in which case
physics will have justified pantheism or at least
panpsychism.
The other alternative, proposed by Dr. Jack Sarfatti, is that
the medium of Bellian transmissions is information.
Pure information, in the mathematical sense, does not
require energy; it is that which orders energy. It is the
negative of entropy, that which brings disorder to energy
systems.
Dr. Sarfatti explains his theory as follows:
Imagine that your brain is a computer, as modern
neurology suggests. Now imagine that the whole universe is
a big computer, a mega-computer, as John Lilly has
proposed. Then imagine that the sub-quantum realm, the
realm of what Dr. David Bohm calls 'hidden variables' is
made up of mini-minicomputers.
Now, the hardware of each 'computer'—the universe, your
brain, the sub-quantum mechanisms—is localized.
Each part of it is somewhere in spacetime, here not there,
now not then. But the software—the information—is nonlocal. It is here, there and everywhere; now, then and
everywhen.
The highest varieties of shamanic and yogic consciousness
seem to begin from dilation beyond the immediate ("outofbody- experience") and dilate, rapidly and dizzily, much
further, to union with the smallest and the largest—the
"Cosmic Mind" in short. This seems to be what would
necessarily happen if the brain turned on to the non-local
information system proposed by Sarfatti and implicit in
Bell's Theorem.
The meta-physiological circuit, then, is this cosmic
Information System. The synchronicities of circuits V to VII
are just the dawning notes of the symphony of all inter-

related harmonies revealed to those who have experienced
Circuit VIII in action. It is hard to avoid hyperbole when
talking of such matters, but everything one can associate
with the idea of Oneness With God—or Oneness with
"Everything"—is part of what is experienced in the vistas,
beyond space-time, of this meta-physiological circuit.
Mystics stammer, gibber and rave incoherently in trying to
discuss this. Beethoven says it for all of them, without
words, in the fourth movement of the Ninth Symphony. The
words of Schiller's "Ode to Joy," which Beethoven set to this
virtually superhuman music, are a linear third-circuit map
conveying only a skeleton key to the multi-level meanings
of the 8-circuit "language" of the melodic construction itself,
which spans all consciousness from primitive bio-survival to
meta-physiological cosmic fusion.

THE WHOLE SYSTEM IS A WHOLE SYSTEM
THE METAPHYSIOLOGICAL CIRCUIT
Wheels within wheels within'wheels...
Dr.
Sarfatti's
computers
within
computers
within
computers...
Consciousness or information perceived as coherent
Intelligence expanding to infinity in all directions.

CHAPTER NINETEEN
PROMETHEUS RISING
We are extending ourselves in Space and Time not because
of capitalism or socialism but in spite o/them. The
Right/Left
Capitalist/
Socialist
establishments
are
psychologically unprepared for our emerging situation in
Time and Space.
— P.M. Esfandiary, Upwingers

According to Patanjali, there are seven "limbs" to yoga, or
as we would say seven steps or stages.
First is asana, which consists of holding a single posture
(usually sitting) for prolonged periods of time. This is an
attempt, in our terminology, to stabilize the bio-survival
circuit by drowning it in monotony. You sit, and sit, and sit,
and sit.
Eventually, an "internal peace" is reached, which signifies
the atrophying of all background levels of "unconscious" or
unnoticed bio-survival anxiety.
In other schools, since asana is so monotonous and
slowworking and because war (second-circuit mammalian
struggles over territory) so common among domesticated
primates, an alternative method of stabilizing the biosurvival circuit is used:

martial arts. Akido, judo, karate etc. all emerged from
yoga-like mystic schools, as bio-survival reprogrammers.
The second step in classical yoga, according to Patanjali, is
pranayama. We have already commented on the efficiency
of this breathing technique in quieting and mellowing-out
secondcircuit emotional programs.
(It will already be seen that yoga, like brainwashing, begins
from the bottom up, working on the more primitive and
older circuits first.)
The third step in yoga is dharana or mantra. Dharana
consists of concentrating on a single image, such as a
vividly imagined red triangle, and ruthlessly pushing aside
any other images, verbalizations or impressions that cross
the mind's screen. In practice, this is beyond the powers of
most students, so the majority of yoga teachers substitute
mantra, which is concentration (by repetition) on a single
sentence, usually nonsensical, such as "Hare Krishna Hare
Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare" or "Aum Tat Sat Aum"
or whatever.
Either practice, dharana or mantra, stops the third-circuit
"internal monologue," if persisted in for long enough
periods each day.
The Western mystical equivalent is Cabala, the most
complicated "Jewish joke" ever invented. Briefly, Cabala
exhausts the third, semantic circuit by setting it to solve
intractable numerological and verbal problems. The Far
Eastern equivalent is the Zen Koan, which serves the same
function in a less maniacally systematic way than Cabala,
e.g., "What is the sound of one hand clapping?" Zen koans
are always combined with zazen (sitting Zen), which
combines the first-circuit-clearing asana with secondcircuit-mellowing breath-counting (a weaker pranayama).
When the student has acquired sufficient detachment from
first-circuit anxieties, second-circuit emotions and thirdcircuit reality-maps, by way of asana, pranayama and
dharana or mantra, Patanjali recommends the practice of
yama. This includes, but is not limited to, celibacy. The
ultimate of yama is to lose all interest in both the social and
sexual aspects of the fourth circuit; to cease to care at all
about family, tribal or societal matters. This is accomplished
by self-denial, which is easier for those skilled in asana,
pranayama and dharana, but still requires intense
determination.
Some take a short-cut at this point, discovered after
Patanjali or not known to him, by having themselves locked
up in caves.
Such isolation, as indicated earlier, helps vastly in bleaching
out all four hominid circuits.
An alternative, for those not attracted to either celibacy or
becoming hermits, is Tantra, invented in northern India
around the time of Patanjali. This simply transmutes the
fourth circuit by ceremonial, physiological arid "magick"
(self-hypnotic) explosion of the (prolonged) sexual act into
fifth-circuit neurosomatic rapture.
For those following the orthodox path of Patanjali, the fifth
circuit is imprinted by niyama, which signifies "supercontrol" or "no-control," being the paradoxical state of
being spontaneous deliberately. You cannot be taught
niyama; you can only learn it by personal experience. We
hypothesize that the bio-energies have to discharge
somewhere, and then when one has driven them out of the
first circuit by asana, out of the second circuit by
pranayama, out of the third circuit by dharana or mantra,
and out of the fourth circuit by yama, they are driven
explosively
upward
into
fifth-circuit
neurosomatic
illumination.
The sixth step in yoga, according to Patanjali, is dhyana,
which means "meditation" only in the roughest way.
Dhyana means actually union with the object on the mind's
screen, i.e., realization of the total meaning of the
proposition that mind and its contents are functionally
identical, i.e., opening the metaprogramming circuit. One
can make dhyana on anything; yogis talk of making dhyana
on a tree or a dog, just as don Juan Matus, the Mexican
shaman, talks of becoming one with a coyote or a star in
the books of Castaneda.
The seventh step in yoga is Samadhi, from sam, (union;
cognate of Greek syn) and Adhis, the Lord (cognate,
Hebrew Adonai, Greek Adonis). Here Patanjali and his
successors are in violent dispute, some claiming there is

only one Samadhi, others claiming two or three or many.
Since this corresponds with the opening and imprinting of
the neurogenetic circuit, we must opt for the opinion that
there are many Samadhi, depending on which or how many
of the Godly archetypes of the genetic archives are
imprinted. Catholic mystics make Samadhi on the Virgin,
Sufis on Allah, Aleister Crowley on Pan, etc.; and, above all
this, the eighth circuit cosmic information network can also
be imprinted, making union not just with all sentient beings
and some emblematic archetype of the DNA master
program, but with the inorganic universe as well. It was
from this second order or meta-physiological Samadhi that
Gandhi said, "God is in the rock, too—in the rock!" and
pantheists of all sorts, in all traditions, emphatically agree
with Canadian psychiatrist, R.M. Bucke who said after his
own Eighth-Circuit Samadhi that the universe "is not a dead
machine but a living presence."
This planet is, to put the matter baldly, populated and
largely controlled by domesticated primates who are not in
all respects reasonable men and women. Voltaire may have
been exaggerating when he said that to understand the
mathematical meaning of infinity, consider the extent of
human stupidity; but the situation is almost that bad.
Millions have been murdered by stupid leaders or stupid
mobs, for stupid reasons, in every century; and the bizarre
(accidentally imprinted) reality-tunnels which make this
possible continue to rule us and robotize us.
Nor is stupidity the exclusive possession of one group or
another; you do not need a "vocation" for it as you do for
the priesthood. It seems to be a contagious socio-semantic
disturbance which afflicts all of us at one time or another.
Notorious examples can be found in the lives of the great.
As we have already mentioned an exact measurement of
the extent of stupidity among the learned is provided by the
fact that every scientific revolution takes one generation.
Elderly scientists hardly ever accept a new theory, however
good it is, and the revolution is only completed when a
second generation, free of the old imprints, with vulnerable
neurons, imprints the new reality-map.
But if science, the paradigm of rationality, is infested with
enough stupidity to cause this general one-generation timelag, what can we say of politics, economics and religion?
Time-lags of thousands of years seem to be "normal" in
these areas. Indeed, it was through contemplation of
religious history that Voltaire was led to his conclusion that
human stupidity approximates to the infinite. The study of
politics is hardly more inspiring. Let us just summarize the
matter by saying that stupidity has murdered and
imprisoned more geniuses (and more ordinary people),
burned more books, slaughtered more populations, and
blocked progress more effectively than any other force in
history.
It may be no exaggeration to say that stupidity has killed
more people than all the diseases known to medicine and
psychiatry.
Intelligence is the capacity to receive, decode and transmit
information efficiently. Stupidity is blockage of this process
at any point. Bigotry, ideologies etc. block the ability to
receive; robotic reality-tunnels block the ability to decode
or integrate new signals; censorship blocks transmission.
If intelligence could be increased, obviously solutions could
be found more quickly to the various Doomsday scenarios
threatening us.
If each scientist working on the energy-resources problem
could double or triple his or her intelligence, work that
would require 20 years might be done in six.
If human stupidity in general decreased, there would be
less opposition to original thinking and new approaches to
our old problems, less censorship and less bigotry.
If stupidity decreased, less money would be wasted on vast
organized imbecilities such as the Arms Race, and more
would be available for life enhancing projects.
There is nothing rationally desirable that cannot be
achieved sooner if rationality itself increases. This is
virtually a tautology, but we must consider the corollary:
Work to achieve Intelligence Intensification is work to
achieve all our other sane and worthwhile goals.
Maurice Nicholl, physician, psychiatrist, student of Jung,
Gurdjieff and Esoteric Christianity, wrote that "the only
purpose in work on consciousness is to decrease the

amount of violence in the world." This is Public Health
Problem Number One in the nuclear age, the age of overkill.
We are not talking about mere increase in linear IQ—
thirdcircuit semantic cleverness. We are talking of also the
kinds of right-brain intelligence that Nicholl acquired from
Jungian neurogenetic research and Gurdjieff's metaprogramming techniques.
We are talking of, say, Beethoven's intelligence, which so
disturbed Lenin, who could not bear to listen to the
Appassionato (Sonata 23) because it made him "want to
weep and pat people on the head, and we mustn't pat them
on the head, we must hit them on the head, hit them hard,
and make them obey."
More of Beethoven's intelligence is needed, desperately, to
create a signal that the current Lenins cannot ignore, that
will make them weep, and stop hitting heads.
We need more mentations, less munitions. The secondcircuit mammalian political games are a million years
obsolete.
Dr. Nathan Kline has predicted that soon we will have drugs
to improve memory, drugs to erase unpleasant memories,
drugs to increase or decrease any emotion, drugs to
prolong or shorten childhood, etc. It takes no great
imagination to foresee that such chemicals will allow us
greater control over our neural tunnel realities than ever
before. Obviously, people will use and abuse these potions
in many ways, but the most intelligent will use them in the
most intelligent way, namely to increase and intensify their
intelligence in every direction possible on our spectrum of
eight circuits. Chiefly, they will use them to increase
neurological freedom, to debug and reprogram obsolete
reality-maps, to generally expand consciousness and
sensitivity to signals and information.
The potential for a neurological revolution—planetary
Intelligence Intensification—should be quite clear to anyone
who has even a slight knowledge of so primitive a
psychedelic as LSD.
One of the least known facts about the LSD research in the
1960s was that the longest single research project with
LSD, at Spring Grove Hospital, Maryland, showed an
average 10% increase in linear IQ alone as well as the
meta-programming vistas and neurogenetic awakenings
popularized by the outlaw LSD culture and its gurus.
And there is a direct feedback loop between neuropharmacology and other brain sciences. As William
Burroughs says, "Anything that can be done chemically can
be done by other means." Yoga plus bio-feedback produces
detachment from old imprints quicker than yoga alone;
hypnotism and mind-drugs produce synergistically more
than either produces without the other; John Lilly has
duplicated LSD effects in his isolation tanks; etc.
It is commonplace for alarmists to warn us that the full
armory of synergistically interacting neurosciences now
evolving will allow unscrupulous tyrants to brainwash us
more totally than ever before.
We need to realize that the same technology, wisely used
by intelligent men and women, can free us from every form
of neurotic and irrational rigidity, to dial and focus our
nervous systems as easily as we dial or focus our TV,
turning any channel or circuit off and on as we choose. This
is what meta-programming (cybernetic) consciousness
means.
Why be depressed when you can be happy, dumb when you
can be smart, agitated when you can be tranquil?
Obviously, most people are depressed, dumb and agitated
most of the time because they lack the tools to repair and
correct damaged, defective circuits in their nervous system.
We are acquiring the tools, and this Intelligence
Intensification has the Pleasure Principle to fuel it. That is,
the more internal freedom you achieve, the more you want.
It is more fun to be happy than sad, more enjoyable to
choose your emotions than to have them inflicted upon you
by mechanical glandular processes, more pleasurable to
solve your problems than to be stuck with them forever.
In brief, Intelligence Intensification means intelligencestudying- intelligence (I2), and the first thing discovered by
intelligence- studying-intelligence (the brain studying the
brain: metaprogramming) is that the more types of
intelligence you have, the more fun it is to try to develop

even more subtle, sensitive, futique levels of awareness;
higher intelligence still.
In summary, Intelligence Intensification is desirable,
because there is not a single problem confronting humanity
that is not either caused or considerably worsened by the
prevailing stupidity (insensitivity) of the species: badly
wired robots bumping into and maiming and killing each
other.
Intelligence Intensification is attainable, because modern
advances in neuroscience are showing us how to alter any
imprinted, conditioned or learned reflex that previously
restricted us.
Intelligence Intensification is hedonic, because the more
freedom and consciousness you achieve, the more you
want; the less willing you are to slip back to dumb, blind,
mechanistic circuits.
Intelligence Intensification can accelerate our progress
toward abolition of war and poverty; find cures for cancer
and schizophrenia; achieve space migration and life
extension (giving us space enough and time enough to
achieve even more cosmic levels of awareness); or
accomplish any other worthwhile goals.
Like death and poverty, stupidity has been around so long
that people cannot imagine human life without it, but it is
rapidly becoming obsolete. However many special interest
groups (intelligence agencies so-called, advertisers, tyrants,
clergy, etc.) may profit from stupidity, humanity as a whole
will profit more for its abolition.
Approximately 50% of the human race has not evolved fully
into the third circuit yet. That is, although they can
exchange primitive signals and handle primitive artifacts,
they are still mostly operating on the mammalian emotional
circuit and the pre-mammalian bio-survival circuit.
Newt Gingrich is their current leader in the United States.
Third-circuit types cannot understand this and regard it as
sinister, but it is simple mammalian herd-behavior. Gingrich
is the typical primate leader; the noises he makes, which
appear meaningless to the third circuit Rationalist, are
urgently meaningful to the territorial-emotional-patriotic
minds of the majority of primates.
Another 20% are "responsible, intelligent adults" with fully
developed third and fourth circuits. They spend most of
their time worrying, because the predominantly primate
parameters of human society seem absurd, immoral and
increasingly dangerous to them.
Another 20% are neurosomatic adepts. Fourth-circuit
Moralists denounce them as "mystics," "space cases,"
"nuts," "the Me generation," "irresponsible hedonists," etc.
Most of the fifth-circuit adepts (aquarian conspirators) have
learned Joyce's arts of "silence, exile, cunning": they are
invisible.
Others have turned their talents to "faith-healing" or
various occult gimmicks of that sort, and very carefully do
not tell their clients that the local ideology, morality and
reality-tunnel is what made them ill in the first place. They
give "good energy" and sensibly avoid conflict with the
moral ideological "authorities."
Another 5% have neurogenetic consciousness, and function
as Evolutionary Agents—servants of the Life Force, in
Shaw's terminology. Their "God" is Pan (life), and their goal
is immortality.
Another 3% have mastered the meta-programming circuit
and make up what Gurdjieff called "the Conscious Circle of
humanity."
They are Free Masons, in the original meaning of that
debased term: co-creators of future realities.
Only 2% are neuro-quantum adepts and beyond space-time
categories entirely.
All these estimates are approximations.
The newer circuits (neurosomatic bliss, neurogenetic
"Atman" consciousness, meta-programming reality-games,
non-local "cosmic" awareness) must have some function.
We can only assume they are preparing us for our new
situation in space-time, after Space colonization, after
longevity and immortality, after the Acceleration Factor
accelerates even faster.
Engineers rate an engine in revolutions-per-second. Looking
at human history in terms of this metaphor we clearly see
that:

In the Old Stone Age, the acceleration factor was just
slowly beginning to operate. We could estimate change
then in, perhaps, revolutions per 10,000 years.
With the neolithic revolution and urbanization soon after,
the pace began to pick up. We can speak from that point on
in terms of revolutions-per-millennium.
After Galileo, revolutions-per-century became the normal
rate of change.
In this century we have moved into revolutions-pergeneration.
We are now obviously moving into an acceleration of
revolutions- per-decade.
By the time the Consciousness Revolution peaks, the
Longevity Pill is widely available, cloning is normal and all
the ideas in the book, including the most wild and radical
ones, seem quaint and old-fashioned—i.e., about 2005—we
will probably be growing accustomed to thinking in terms of
revolutions-per-year.
There is no reason to accept the tunnel-reality of this book
as final. If you really understand the message, you will
invent a bigger and better Future than I have suggested. As
Barbara Marx Hubbard says:

THE FUTURE EXISTS FIRST IN IMAGINATION,
THEN IN WILL, THEN IN REALITY
APPENDIX

The neurogenetic script, cyclical aspect:
1. The helpless infant (Circuit I).
2. The walking-struggling-competing child (Circuit II).
3. The word-and-tool-using older child (Circuit III).
4. Imprinting-conditioning the sexual circuit (IV) into
domesticated parenthood.
5. Reproduction and.. .the cycle continues...
"...their weatherings and their marryings and their buryings
and their natural selections...
— James Joyce, Finnegans Wake

The neurogenetic script, upward-spiraling aspect:
1. Primitive organisms; recapitulated in infancy.

2. Vertebrate struggle, recapitulated in childhood.
3. Semantic-technological learning, recapitulated in school.
4. Socio-sexual domesticity.
5. Neurosomatic rapture, pre-capitulating zero-gravity and
Space Migration.
6.
Neurogenetic
vision,
pre-capitulating
LongevityImmortality.
7. Meta-programming skill, pre-capitulating Intelligence
Intensification.
8. Meta-physiological cosmic vision, pre-capitulating...
WHAT?

