ANCHOR POINT

NLP and Coaching

Meta–States
and the Inner Game
The Inner Game is Played out in the Matrix of your Mind
by L. Michael Hall, Ph.D.

In 1972 Timothy Gallwey wrote the book, The Inner
Game of Tennis, which soon became a best seller. When I
recently bought a copy of it, it was in the Sports section
of the bookstore. And no wonder, the book is about
tennis, playing tennis, and developing skills for learning to
play better and become more masterful at the game of
tennis.
Yet it is about much more than that. It is really about
The Inner Game that we play in our mind about games. It
is about the inner Frame Game that we play in the Matrix
of our mind about anything and everything—relationships,
business, health, learning, and even life itself. The book
that is to this day in the sports section is really about
human psychology, development, and learning. The book
is about the Frames of Mind that enrich and support mastery and those that undermine and sabotage peak performance.
What Gallwey, as a sports coach, discovered in his work
was the Inner Game that is so obviously a set of meta–
states that provide the key frame of mind for performance
and excellence. What I found in his work is a model that
is so close to NLP and Neuro–Semantics that I’m really
surprised that so few NLP people even know about it.
The meta–state frames that he discovered are just a few
basic ones: non–judgmental awareness, willingness to explore and experiment with feedback, trusting our natural
self for accelerated learning, and a focused awareness that
allows us to be in this moment.
February, 2003

After his first book Gallwey wrote, or co-authored,
several other books, Inner Skiing (1997, with Bob Kriegel),
The Inner Game of Music (1986, with Barry Green), and
The Inner Game of Work (2000). All of these books highlight the ideas and model that he discovered in 1972 that
make up what he now calls the inner game.
Ian McDermott pointed me to Gallwey’s work. While
talking about coaching, Ian shared some of his excitement about the inner game and how he had incorporated the focus on non–judgmental awareness in his book,
The NLP Coach. Upon reading Gallway’s works, I also found
that they fit snugly inside of the Meta–States model and
our user–friendly version about meta–states, Frame Games.
They fit so snugly, in fact, that the connection between
Gallwey’s model of the Inner Game and the Neuro–Semantics model of Frame Games is uncanny. Given our focused adventure into Neuro–Semantic Coaching, questions have arisen recently regarding how the Inner Game
fits with and corresponds with Frame Games. The following offers a partial answer to some of these questions.
• How does the Inner Game fit with or relate to NLP
and Meta–States?
• Which is a meta–state, Self 1 or Self 2?
• Is Self 2 another way to talk about “Accessing Personal Genius?”
• What does the Inner Game add to NLP and Neuro–
Semantics?

3 - Anchor Point

ANCHOR POINT

• What do NLP and Neuro-Semantics add to the Inner Game?
• How does the Inner Game fit
or relate to Frame Games?

Gallwey’s The Inner
Game
To summarize the Inner Game I
have heightened the key principles
that stand out in Gallwey’s books.
While there are additional ideas and
suggestions for improving performance, these are the primary ones.
What follows also is a more extensive summary description that what
you can find in Gallway’s books.

1) There are two games that
we all play, an Outer Game
and an Inner Game.
The outside game is the one with
outside opponents and is the game
that most of us focus on and care
about. The inner game is subtler, less
easily noticed, and more quickly forgotten. “It is played out in the arena
of your mind.” (1986, p. 10).
The game ends up playing
the person rather than the other
way around. There are two reasons: Success in the Inner
Game is very often the deciding factor between success in
your outer game and failure.
Second the Inner Game is a fascinating game in its own
right—and the only game that
can be “applied” to all other
games. (p. 11)
The inner game is about attitude.
It is about being able to access the
right attitude when we play so that
4 - Anchor Point

we can be at our best. This is a positive attitude made up of focus, acceptance, fun, openness, learning, etc.

3) The key to success and
top-performance is to ACT
(Awareness, Choice, Trust).

2) Learning is easy and
incredible when we tap into
our natural learning state.
We interfere with natural
learning by commands,
demands, judgments, and
criticism.

Success arises from three resourceful states: awareness (knowing
the present situation with clarity),
choice (moving in a desired direction
in the future), and trust (of one’s inner resources as the essential link).
These three factors make for success in any field.

We are born fantastically avid
learners. When we are curious, engaged, fascinated, and having fun, learning is easy, inevitable, and magical.
Problems with learning arise when
we force learning, frame learning with
shoulds and should nots, and when
the learning is full of content–driven
instructions. Similarly, the biggest
problem in performance is that we
interfere with our learning. We interfere with it through judging ourselves,
criticizing ourselves, distrusting ourselves (our natural self, potentials,
abilities), becoming afraid of failing,
losing control, messing up, etc.
Gallwey calls the interference Self
1. When Self 1 gets in the way, we
stop seeing the tennis ball as a ball
and begin seeing it as a threat or as a
challenge. Self 1 intentions also get in
the way. They are in the way of Self 2’s
natural ease, grace, and learning. Non–
judgment awareness enables us to stop
the inference and to see the ball as a
ball. The paradox is that we typically
over–teach. When we overload the
conscious mind with too many instructions, performance suffers.

Awareness is non–judgmental
awareness; it is awareness of what is.
Choice is the power to recognize
where we want to go with clarity and
precision and ownership of one’s
power to take charge.
Trust is trusting the natural learning
powers of one’s true self, Self 2. This
is the self that expresses our potential, “the vast reservoir of potential
within each one of us” that contains
our natural talents and abilities.

4) Trying fails; Awareness cures.
Gallwey quotes Fritz Perls for this
paradoxical phrase. He makes the
point that the harder we try, the more
confused things become. His “power
of awareness” is what we call sensory
awareness or acuity. In NLP we quote
another line of Perls that contributes
to our success: “Lose your mind and
come to your senses.” More often
than not, we do not need more instructions, we need more awareness
and more doing. When we fill our
head with content instructions, this
typically creates more pressure within
us to “try harder.”

February, 2003

ANCHOR POINT

Awareness at the primary state
level is awareness of the engagement
we’re involved in. This sensory awareness keeps us involved, interested,
curious, and absorbed. It is the metastate of awareness of our awareness
and awareness of our concepts and
ideas that takes us out of the moment, out of the experience, and
sends us into our heads.
Pure awareness is seeing reality for
what it is, seeing the sensory dimension clearly. Gallwey discovered that
if he asked the tennis player to watch
the seams of the ball, that this awareness instruction would invite the
player into the moment and simultaneously disengage the higher level
judgments and evaluations. “To see
things as they are, we must take off
our judgmental glasses.” (1974, p. 25)
Such pure awareness allows us to
then just observe and just report.
To simply accept reality for what it
is, to accept the reality of our stroke,
the return of the ball, our response
as it is acknowledges the is.
Acknowledgment of one’s
own or another’s strengths,
efforts, accomplishments, etc.,
can facilitate natural learning,
whereas judgments interfere.
… Acknowledgment of and
respect for one’s capabilities
support trust in Self 2.
(1974, p. 30)
The same applies for changing old
habits. “There is no need to fight old
habits. Start new ones. It is the resisting of an old habit that puts you
in that trench.” (1974, p. 67). Instead
just freshly observe your responses
now. Take interest in it, discover its
February, 2003

range. Simply observe without interfering. Otherwise we get into the
negative downward spiraling loops of
the Dragon that we deal with in
Meta–States. This occurs when we
turn our thoughts and feelings against
ourselves, which we do with rejection, disowning, judgment, etc.

In Meta–States, we accomplish this
by applying acceptance to what is, acceptance to the process of acting and
getting feedback, and releasing the old
taboos and prohibitions through giving ourselves permission to be human, to be fallible, and to accept reality on its terms.

5) Permission to fail leads
to success.

6) We learn best via
experiential learning.

Here is another irony or paradox.
If we do not allow ourselves to fail,
failure becomes more and more semantically loaded with meaning. This
prevents it from being part of the
learning process, the trial and error
learning that we used as infants when
we first learn to walk. It prevents failing from being part of the feedback
process which then helps us to refine our performance. Suddenly failure becomes so semantically loaded,
our fear of it prevents us from succeeding.

Self 2 learns by discovery—by doing rather than thinking about doing.
This exceeds the conceptual learning of Self 1. The problem is that when
we over–value achievement above
awareness, we lose control. Judging
whether we are achieving or not,
succeeding or not, winning over another or not—these are the concepts that get in the way.

Giving ourselves permission
to fail sidesteps any concern we
might otherwise feel about
performance. It allows us to stop
trying. When we allow this, we
don’t fail. It releases us from the
fear of failure. (p. 31)
As we let go of the judging process, we regain permission to fail and
to use such for feedback.
Letting go of the judging
process is a basic key to the
Inner Game… When we
unlearn how to be judgmental, it is possible to
achieve spontaneous, focused
play. (1974, p. 19)

Awareness is experiencing
something directly; thinking is
to conceptualize about what we
are experiencing. The more we
think about an experience, the
less aware we become of the
experience itself. As thinking
increases, awareness decreases.
(1977, p. 42)
In experiential learning,we still need
instructions, but not those “cast in the
bronze of dogma.” We need “instructions” that are more like hints and
guidelines. Then we can use them to
guide our own personal discovery of
how to apply the guideline to ourselves.
In this, we are not so much obeying a
rule as discovering a principle for how
to play a particular Game.

5 - Anchor Point

ANCHOR POINT

7) Awareness is fed and
nourished on sensory
specific feedback.
Gallwey describes feedback as a
mirror, as non–evaluative feedback
that is grounded in fact. This is a
coach’s primary tool and because it
is “vulnerable to becoming judgmental,” it has to be handled with care.
The experiences which we call
mistakes are actually valuable
feedback which our bodies need
in order to discriminate between
what works for us and what
doesn’t and to make the
appropriate corrections. What
we need to eliminate is not the
mistakes t h e m s e l v e s , b u t
our fear of making them and
the consequent judgments,
criticisms, and anger. Accepting
errors we make less of them.
Such self–judgment distorts
perception, interferes with
performance and retards our
abilities to learn and perform.
(1977, p. 50)
NLP has long focused on the importance of feedback, that “there is
no failure, only feedback,” and in
Neuro–Semantics we focus on avoiding the set up of a negative emotional
state like fear about making a mistake. Recognizing that to fear or hate
or reject a mistake creates a metastate structure that turns our psychological energies against ourselves, we use the seeming “paradoxical” process of accepting mistakes
and welcoming them.

6 - Anchor Point

8) Our focus of attention is
the secret to mastery.
Attention is critical to all learning,
understanding, and proficiency of action. It’s only when we are giving our
full attention to what we are doing
that we can bring all of our resources
to bear effectively.
Focus is the quintessential
component of superior performance
in every activity, no matter what
the level of skill or the age of the
performer. We do our best when we
are focused.
(2000, p. 43)
What is focus? Is it a skill that we
can develop by learning a technique?
No.
It is more a function of your
motivations being lined up
behind what you are doing.
Interest, motivation, and choice
all have a great deal to do with
one’s ability to focus deeply and
to sustain that focus over long
periods of time.
This describes what we call the genius state in Meta–States training (Accessing Personal Genius), the state
of aligning all of our highest intentions so that we can step into an
engagement that allows us to let go
of time, self, and the world. In this
focus state we are fully engaged in
the moment, fully present. It is this
engagement attention that creates a
quietness to our mind inasmuch as
we only have one thing on our mind.
With all of our mind fully engaged,
there is no noise interfering from
other facets. We have fully entered
into the engagement. This is what
interest means, to be in (“inter –
est,” est, to exist, inter, inside). This

explains our focused con–centration.
We are centered in and with something. It calls and pulls on us as an
attractor in a self–organizing system.
That’s why focus is so easy. We experience engagement attention when
we are there with interest, curiosity,
and fascination.And, the more awareness we have, the less judgment.

9) Success involves getting
the clearest possible picture
of your outcomes.
This is what moves us toward our
goals. In the context of kinesthetic
learnings (like tennis, skiing, and golf)
Gallwey says that we mostly need
“imagery: sensory images. Movements are learned through visual and
feeling images.” (1974, p. 39). So that’s
what we need to provide for our Self
2 mind.
In designing goals, Gallwey also
suggests that because three of the
critical factors for success are performance, learning, and enjoyment,
we enrich our goal–setting by setting not only performance goals, but
also learning goals and enjoyment
goals (2000, pp. 89ff). In designing desired outcomes we therefore need
to set goals about the performance
and also learning goals and enjoyment
goals. This accords with the NLP
Well–Formed Outcome Pattern that
provides a coaching model for setting realistic and compelling goals.

10) Success depends on
mobility and flexibility.
Mobility refers to the ability to
move in any desired direction without self–constraint. Driven by our
February, 2003

ANCHOR POINT

deepest urgings, it is the quest for
movement. This allows change to
take place in an organic way, that is,
through awareness and choice. We
can then move toward our vision by
having a clear picture of our goal,
keeping adapting and changing as we
go, keeping our purposes clear and
keeping synchronizing our movement
and direction. This enables us to invent it as we go, or as Gallwey put it,
If I can have the courage to
acknowledge my desire as it
exists, without necessarily
knowing how to fulfill it,
mobility can start.
(2000, p. 129)
We speak about such “mobility”
in terms of flexibility in NLP. “The
person with the most flexibility in a
system will be the one who will have
the most influence in that system.”

11) When we create “think
space” we can step back and
make clear decisions.
Gallwey describes this using the
acronym STOP: Step back,Think, Organize your thinking, Proceed. Using
the metaphor of going up a mountain
to get a larger perspective of the
whole situation, he speaks about thinking about our thinking, about “putting
distance between self and whatever
you’re involved in at the moment”
(2000, pp. 145, 150). This puts us back
in the driver’s seat to “run our own
brain” as we say in NLP. It enables us
to make the meta–move to a higher
frame of mind thereby gaining a larger
perspective. We do this through
adopting different perceptual positions
or stepping into a higher executive
state of mind using Meta–States.
February, 2003

12) We coach best through
getting into the head of our
client.
The primary coaching tool for facilitating change is transposing, that is, taking second perceptual position to another person. The state of empathy is
created by transposing ourselves into
another’s position. Timothy describes
this as his way of first figuring out what
people were doing as they played tennis that was interfering with their game.
He said he learned to coach without
judgments by seeking to discover how
another person thinks and feels and
keeping himself to feedback. This accords with the focus on rapport,matching and mirroring, taking second position, etc. in NLP.

Coaching for
Transformative
Change
If our primary difficulty is that we
get in our own way and interfere in
unnecessary and problematic ways
with our own success, how do we
change that?
• How do we get out of our own
way?
• What is the pathway to change?
• How can we learn better?
• How can we transform these
old habits?
• What can we specifically do to
get out of our way?
Gallwey describes change as both
learning and coaching. Learning for
him is what we all do naturally. “Natural learning” is our birthright. And it
is easy, graceful, and inevitable if we
can just get out of our way, stop the

self–judgment,and stop our Self 1 from
interfering with our Self 2. This is
where awareness (non-judgmental
awareness) becomes so critical in the
Inner Game. Frequently, he speaks
about awareness as magical and curative per se. Frequently, that’s all one
needs.
When more is needed, this is
where coaching becomes important.
Is it any surprise that, as a tennis
coach, Gallwey then moved into Business Coaching or that he uses the
metaphor of a coach for describing
growth, development, and change?
Coaching is an art that must
be learned mostly from
experience in the Inner Game
approach, coaching is “the
facilitation of mobility.” It is the
art of creating an environment
through conversation, and a way
of being, that facilitates the process
by which a person can move
toward desired goals in a fulfilling
manner. It requires one essential
ingredient that cannot be taught:
Caring not only for the external
results byt for the person being
coached.
(2000, p. 177)
In NLP we believe that people have
all the resources they need, and only
need to sequence and order their
resources to create the very best
maps and strategies for succeeding.
Doing so means using experiential
learning so that each individual finds
his or her way of doing precisely that.
Working with another person is
mostly a matter of creating the right
physical and inter–personal environment.

7 - Anchor Point

ANCHOR POINT

Coaching is eavesdropping in on someone’s thinking
process. The most important
part of the job of a coach is to
listen well. Effective coaching
in the workplace holds a
mirror up for clients, so they
can see their own thinking
process. As a coach, I am not
listening for the content of
what is being said as much as
I am listening to the way they
are thinking, including how
their attention is focused and
how they define the key
elements of the situation.”
(p. 182)
In NLP and Neuro–Semantics we
constantly highlight the difference
between Structure and Content. The
process structure of an experience
operates at a meta–level to the content of the details of a person’s story.
And it is the structure that makes
the biggest difference for transformation. The way a person thinks, sorts,
codes, and perceives are summarized
and encoded in the Meta–Model, the
Meta–Programs, and the Meta–States
models.
It is essential to the Inner
Game of Coaching that the
coach try to see from the point
of view of the person being
coached. By learning to listen
to the client non–judgmentally, the coach learns the most
important elements of the craft.
Learning to ask questions that
help clients reveal more and
more to themselves is a natural
outcome of such listening. The
coach’s questions are geared to
finding out information not for

8 - Anchor Point

the purpose of recommending
solutions, but for the purpose
of helping clients think for
themselves and find their own
solutions. Ideally, the end of
every coaching conversation
is that the client leaves feeling
more capable of mobility.”
(p. 188)
Again, this highlights how much we
believe in each person’s natural ability to find and nurture the resources
that are within. By working at the
meta–level of structure and process,
we can best coach the person to find
and customize their own strategies
for success.

Coaching as a MetaConversation
What does a coach ultimately do
with his players and his team? He talks
to them. He uses words to encourage, to focus attention, to build trust,
to fuel desire. It is the kind of conversations that makes the difference.
Noting that the coach is not “on
the team” operationally, he says that
it is often easier to establish a
stepped–back perspective (a metastate of a meta–perspective). And by
standing outside the assumptions and
demands of the performance momentum,“the coach can help the client to STOP: Step back, think, and
organize before proceeding.” (2000,
p. 195). This is meta–coaching at its
best, is it not? Gallwey even says that
“Coaching doesn’t require expertise
in the subject matter.” In fact, content expertise can actually interfere
with meta–coaching.

When you know a lot, it’s
all too easy to start teaching.
But coaching is about helping
him discover what he already
knows, or can find out for
himself. Teaching takes a long
time and is about imparting
knowledge. Coaching can be
viewed not so much as a
process of adding as it is a
process of subtracting, or
unlearning whatever is
getting in the way of
movement toward the client’s
desired goal. (p. 210)

The Meta–States
Inner Game
Without any theoretical foundation for the levels of the mind, the
logical and psycho–logical levels of
awareness, Gallwey came up with
Self 1 and Self 2.
A major breakthrough in my
attempts to understand the art
of relaxed concentration came
when, while teaching, I again
began to notice what was
taking place before my eyes.
Listen to the way players talk
to themselves on the court:
“Come on, Tom, meet the ball
in front of you”… Who is
telling whom what? Most
players are talking to
themselves on the court all the
time. “Get up for the ball.”
“Keep it to his backhand.”
“Keep your eyes on the ball.”
“Bend your knees”… It’s like
hearing a tape recording of the
last lesson playing inside their
head… One day I asked

February, 2003

ANCHOR POINT

myself, Who was talking to
whom? Who was scolding
and who being scolded. “I’m
talking to myself,” say most
people. But just who is this “I”
and who the ’‘myself”?
Obviously, the “I” and the
”myself” are separate entities or
there would be no conversation,
so one could say that within
each player there are two
’‘selves.” One, the “I,” seems
to give instructions; the other,
“myself” seems to perform the
action. Then “I” returns with
an evaluation of the action.
For clarity let’s call the
“teller”Self 1 and the
“doer”Self 2.
While all of this is very clumsy and
awkward both conceptually and linguistically, it enabled him to separate
two dimensions or levels of “self.”
Later he would identify Self 1 as our
interference containing our concepts
about how things should be, our judgments and associations (several metastates). He would then define Self 2
as the vast reservoir of potential
within each one of us.
If it interferes with your
potential — it is Self 1.
If it expresses your
potential — it is Self 2.
(1986, p. 17)
In terms of meta–states, Self 2 is a
primary state—it is our primary self,
free and unencumbered with metalevel concepts, ideas, demands, commands, taboos, prohibitions, rules, etc.
We are born as this being–self (Self

February, 2003

2) and then we get lots of interfering
rules, ideas, limiting beliefs, toxic ideas,
and un–useful maps in our heads at a
meta–level, at a level about our Natural Being–Self. This makes up an unnatural and Self–Sabotaging or Self–
Interfering meta–state (Self 1). This is
the Dragon State that turns on oneself with rules, demands, judgments,
rejection, anger, fear, dread, guilt, etc.
This is what gets in the way.
In Gallwey’s Inner Game, he seeks
to create a better relationship between “conscious teller Self 1 and the
natural capabilities of Self 2.” We
speak about this in meta–states as
the relationship that arises whenever
we bring one state of mind–emotionbody to another. In creating a metarelationship between states, what is
the quality of the interface? If we bring
judgment or negative emotions to
any previous state, we put ourselves
at odds with ourselves, create a
Dragon state, and attack ourselves.
As a result, our mind, emotions, and
body will pay the price.
How does Meta–States address
some of the key Inner Game skills?
Mostly in the meta–state pattern of
Acceptance, Appreciation, and Awe. We
begin with this is the pattern in MetaStates (Accessing Personal Genius)
because acceptance builds up a nonjudgmental mind of acknowledgment
of what is and the willingness to welcome it into our world even if we
are not delighted or thrilled about it.
We do this to consciously build up
ego–strength. Appreciation is accessed next and applied to self, talents, and life to build up self–appreciation so we can play to our
strengths, focus on solutions, and
counter–act the negative states of

judgment or discounting. Awe is then
accessed to let one’s very perception
shift from boredom and disinterest
to seeing the sacred and preciousness in everyday life, in oneself, in
others.

How Judgment Puts
the Matrix into a
Spin
If judgment means “the act of assigning a negative or positive value to
an event” (1974, p. 20), then judgment
is what prevents us from seeing what
is and imposing our evaluations on
things. In the Matrix Model, we identified this as lying at the heart of the
Meaning matrix. It’s how we give
meaning to things. Of course, when
we are evaluating things in terms of
good or bad, right or wrong, for me
or against me, we are seeing the world
and the events of the world in terms
of these ideas and concepts rather
than what they are in themselves.
This activates the Intention matrix.
If the ball coming at us is no longer a
ball, but success or failure, being a hero
or a goat, a reflection of our identity,
etc., then our intention will shift from
the primary level of awareness intention
to a meta–level. Now we will be trying
hard to succeed, to win, to shine, to
not make a fool of ourselves, to prove
ourselves, etc. Yet it is in this very trying
that our muscles become tight and rigid,
that we over-strive, and that we interfere with our best performance. It happens when playing tennis, making music, making a public speech, typing, asking questions, learning, etc.
As the judgments of the Meaning
matrix frames things with these
9 - Anchor Point

ANCHOR POINT

over–valued meanings, and the Intention matrix tries to perform, we become highly self–conscious in our
performances which then interferes
with learning, fun, and the quality of
the performance. This begins the
negative spiraling. We begin going
round and round the judgment. The
harder we try, the more self–conscious we feel. The more self–conscious we feel the more our ego gets
involved and feels threatened. The
more we feel threatened, the more
we bring yet more judgments or fear
of judgments against ourselves.
We then begin questioning and
judging our Self. This activates the
Self matrix. “What’s wrong with me?”
“I know better than that!” “I’m just
no good at this; I always freeze up
when I’m on the spot!” These selfjudgments undermine one’s sense of
power and resourcefulness, thereby
activating the Power matrix and becoming self–fulfilling prophecies. The
more this continues, the more we
fear that it will always be this way.
And as we go more into a negative
self–judgment state, the more we
remember other times like this. This
activates the Time matrix. And then
the Other matrix,“What will others
think of me?” Then the World matrix, “Everybody will see this my failure and this will have consequences
at home, at work, with friends, etc.”
This vividly describes how judgment frames can set a whole Matrix
into a spin. It initiates a hypnotic process where we set expectations
frames and belief frames based on
the judgment.
Once our judgmental mind
establishes a self–identity
10 - Anchor Point

based on its negative judgments,
the role–playing continues to
hide the true potential of Self 2
until the hypnotic spell is broken.
In short, you start to become
what you think. (1974, p. 21)
So what if we just stop? What if
we just cut out the judgment? What
if we raise our hand and swear that
from this day forward we will stop
judging ourselves? We will stop bringing negative emotions and thoughts
against ourselves? This is precisely
what we do in Meta–States training.
And inevitably whenever I initiate that
little ritual, the Dragon within many
people complains bitterly. Every time
I bring this up on our international
egroup—there are always people to
challenge me on this. Gallway has
noticed the same:
When asked to give up
making judgments about
one’s game, the judgmental
mind usually protests, “But
if I can’t hit a backhand inside
the court to save my life, do
you expect me to ignore my
faults and pretend my game
is fine?” Be clear of this:
letting go of judgments does
not mean ignoring errors. It
simply means seeing events
as they are and not adding
anything to them.
(1974, p. 21)
Meta–States cues us about the factor of levels in our mind and in our
experience. There are levels of awareness. Primary state awareness is
awareness about some see, hear, feel,
smell, or taste experience in the world.
We call this awareness, sensory–based
awareness. It is an awareness engaged

with some event in the world and that
demands we be present,and no where
else, and that we be in this moment,
and at no other time.
Meta–state awareness is awareness of our awareness. This moves
us up into our head, into awareness
about our memories and imaginations, about our ideas and understandings and beliefs, and expectations, and principles and all of the
other meta–phenomena. In this
awareness, we are not present or
here. We are somewhere else. It’s
another kind of engagement and very
useful at times, but not when we are
seeking to be engaged in the world
with someone or some thing.

The Art of Giving
Instructions
To be a coach is to give instructions. But it is not to give content instructions as much as process instructions. And there is a big difference
between such. Content instructions
are generally all of the rules and regulations about how to play, the shoulds
and shouldn’ts. Content instructions
typically arise by watching the experts
or someone performing at a high level
of performance, and then using the
content information of that person’s
style as the model for how everybody
else ought to do it.Yet it is this very
premise that then hinders each learner
in finding his or her best style and way.
Content information is what Gallwey
calls the interference of Self 1.
When a sports coach provides
instructions about how to do something, these are usually the technical
instructions that govern a given field
February, 2003

ANCHOR POINT

whether it is tennis, skiing, gymnastics, etc. These typically come from
the best practices and experts that
have been modeled. This raises the
question about how to “give these
instructions” without it filling up the
mind (i.e., Self 1) and causing interference with finding one’s natural
style? The answer lies in giving more
awareness instructions than content.
This allows the learner to find his or
her own way.

This means offering instructions as
relative guidelines, to be experimentally tested, and adjusted to one’s own
self for usefulness and validity. Instructions are not absolute commands to
be obeyed. The locus of control
about it’s validity should remain internal to the person and not posited
on some external expert.The coach
best coaches by asking questions that
evoke exploration, awareness, discovery, and experimentation.

The same applies for life coaches,
executive coaches, organizational
coaches, and business coaches. If we
learn best through trusting our Being Self to learn, to use experience to
make the best kind of learnings, then
how do we handle the giving of instructions? If filling a person’s mind
with lots of dos and don’ts, shalls and
shall nots, shoulds and should nots actually interfere with natural learning,
then how do we provide instructions
effectively?

Gallway uses the As If Frame (although he doesn’t call it that) as a
technique for coaching. He calls “Asking for Qualities” and describes it as
a form of role–playing. Using the As
if Frame, he says imagine that he is a
movie director and you are an actor
who plays tennis and you take on and
adopt various qualities as I call for as
the director. So when you are called
to adopt “supreme self–assurance”
you just step into the role and play
that part.

The short answer is that a
valid instruction derived
from experience can help me
if it guides me to my own
experiential discovery... I
believe the best use of
technical knowledge is to
communicate a hint toward a
desired destination. The
hint can be delivered
verbally or demonstrated in
action, but it is best seen as
an approximation of a desired
goal to be discovered by paying
attention… and feeling one’s
way toward what works for
that individual.
(1974, pp. 50-51)

When a player succeeds in
forgetting himself and really
acts out his assumed role,
remarkable changes in his
game often take place.
(1974, p. 43)

February, 2003

Did Gallwey Know
NLP?
There’s no indication that he did
or does. He certainly uses the sensory systems throughout his books,
and he details out the visual, auditory,
and kinesthetic features (and even
using these terms). He even writes,
“The map is not the territory; the
concept is not the experience.”

(1977, p. 111) and yet gives no references for that quote from Korzybski.
In fact, this is a major weakness in all
of these books, there is no bibliography or references in any of them.

REFERENCES:
Gallwey,W.Timothy. (1974/ 1997). The inner
game of tennis. Revised Edition. New
York: Random House.
Gallwey, Timothy; Kriegel, Bob. (1977). Inner
skiing. NY: Random House.
Green, Barry; Gallwey,W.Timothy. (1986). The
inner game of music. Garden City, NY:
Anchor Press, Doubleday.
Gallwey,W.Timothy. (2000). The inner game
of Work: Focus, learning, pleasure, and mobility in the workplace. New York: Random House Trade Paperbacks.
Hall, Michael. (1995/2000). Meta-states: Managing the higher levels of your mind’s reflexivity. Grand Jct., CO: Neuro-Semantic
Publications.
Hall, L. Michael. (2000). Secrets of personal
mastery: Advanced techniques for accessing your higher levels of consciousness.
Wales, UK: Crown House Publications.
Hall, L. Michael. (2000). Frame games: Persuasion elegance. Grand Junction, CO:
Neuro-Semantic Publications.
Hall, L. Michael. (2002). Games business experts play. Wales, UK: Crown House
Publications.
McDermott, Ian; Jago,Wendy. (2001). The NLP
coach: A comprehensive guide to personal
well-being and professional success. London:
Platkus, Action Printing.
ANCHORPOINT

L. Michael Hall, Ph.D., is a psychologist turned
Neuro–Semanticist trainer, researcher, and
modeler. He lives in the Rocky Mountains
of beautiful Colorado and is author of over
30 books. P.O. Box 8, Clifton, CO. 81520 USA
Michael@neurosemantics.com

11 - Anchor Point

ANCHOR POINT

12 - Anchor Point

February, 2003

ANCHOR POINT

February, 2003

13 - Anchor Point

ANCHOR POINT

14 - Anchor Point

February, 2003

