P.D. OUSPENSKY

THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MAN'S POSSIBLE
EVOLUTION

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

INTRODUCTION

SOME YEARS ago I began to receive letters from readers of my

books. All these letters contained one question, what I had been
doing after I had written my books, which were published in
English in 1920 and 1931, and had been written in 1910 and 1912.
I could never answer these letters. It would have needed books,
even to attempt to do this. But when the people who wrote to
me lived in London, where I lived after 1921, I invited them and
arranged courses of lectures for them. In these lectures I tried to
answer their questions and explain what I had discovered after I
had written my two books, and what was the direction of my
work.
In 1934 I wrote five preliminary lectures which gave a general
idea of what I was studying, and also of the lines along which a
certain number of people were working with me. To put all that
in one, or even in two or three lectures, was quite impossible: so I
always warned people that it was not worth while hearing one
lecture, or two, but that only five, or better ten lectures could
give an idea of the direction of my work. These lectures have
continued since then, and throughout this time I have often
corrected and rewritten them.
On the whole I found the general arrangement satisfactory.
Five lectures were read, in my presence or without me; listeners
could ask questions; and if they tried to follow the advice and
indications given them,

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

which referred chiefly to self-observation and a certain selfdiscipline, they very soon had a quite sufficient working
understanding of what I was doing.
I certainly recognised all the time that five lectures were not
sufficient, and in talks that followed them I elaborated and
enlarged the preliminary data, trying to show people their own
position in relation to the New Knowledge.
I found that the chief difficulty for most people was to realise
that they had really heard new things, that is, things that they had
never heard before.
They did not formulate it for themselves, but in fact they
always tried to contradict this in their minds and translate what
they heard into their habitual language, whatever it happened to
be. And this certainly I could not take into account.
I know that it is not an easy thing to realize that one is hearing
new things. We are so accustomed to the old tunes, and the old
motives, that long ago we ceased to hope and ceased to believe
that there might be anything new.
And when we hear new things, we take them for old, or think
that they can be explained and interpreted by the old. It is true
that it is a difficult task to realize the possibility and necessity of
quite new ideas, and it needs with time a revaluation of all usual
values.
I cannot guarantee that you will hear new ideas, that is, ideas you
never heard before, from the start;
but if you are patient you will very soon begin to notice them.
And then I wish you not to miss them, and to try not to interpret
them in the old way.
New York, 1945.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

FIRST LECTURE

I SHALL speak about the study of psychology, but I must warn you
that the psychology about which I speak is very different from
anything you may know under this name.
To begin with I must say that practically never in history has
psychology stood at so low a level as at the present time. It has lost
all touch with its origin and its meaning so that now it is even
difficult to define the term psychology: that is, to say what
psychology is and what it studies. And this is so in spite of the fact
that never in history have there been so many psychological
theories and so many psychological writings.
Psychology is sometimes called a new science. This is quite
wrong. Psychology is, perhaps, the oldest science, and,
unfortunately, in its most essential features a forgotten science.
In order to understand how psychology can be denned it is
necessary to realise that psychology except in modern times has
never existed under its own name. For one reason or another
psychology always was suspected of wrong or subversive tendencies.
either religious or political or moral and had to use different
disguises.
For thousands of years psychology existed under the name of
philosophy. In India all forms of Yoga, which are essentially
psychology, are described as one of the six systems of philosophy.
Sufi teachings. which again are

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

chiefly psychological, are regarded as partly religious and partly
metaphysical. In Europe, even quite recently in the last decades of
the nineteenth century, many works on psychology were referred
to as philosophy. And in spite of the fact that almost all subdivisions of philosophy such as logic, the theory of cognition,
ethics, aesthetics, referred to the work of the human mind or
senses, psychology was regarded as inferior to philosophy and as
relating only to the lower or more trivial sides of human nature.
Parallel with its existence under the name of philosophy,
psychology existed even longer connected with one or another
religion. It does not mean that religion and psychology ever were
one and the same thing, or that the fact of the connection between
religion and psychology was recognised. But there is no doubt that
almost every known religion—certainly I do not mean modern
sham religions—developed one or another kind of psychological
teaching connected often with a certain practice, so that the study
of religion very often included in itself the study of psychology.
There are many excellent works on psychology in quite
orthodox religious literature of different countries and epochs. For
instance, in early Christianity there was a collection of books of
different authors under the general name of Philokalia, used in our
time in the Eastern Church, especially for the instruction of
monks.
During the time when psychology was connected with
philosophy and religion it also existed in the form of Art. Poetry,
Drama, Sculpture, Dancing, even Architecture, were means for
transmitting psychological knowledge. For instance, the Gothic
Cathedrals were in their chief meaning works on psychology.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

In the ancient times before philosophy, religion and art had
taken their separate forms as we now know them, psychology had
existed in the form of Mysteries, such as those of Egypt and of
ancient Greece.
Later, after the disappearance of the Mysteries, psychology
existed in the form of Symbolical Teachings which were sometimes
connected with the religion of the period and sometimes not
connected, such as Astrology, Alchemy, Magic, and the more
modern: Masonry, Occultism and Theosophy.
And here it is necessary to note that all psychological systems
and doctrines, those that exist or existed openly and those that
were hidden or disguised, can be divided into two chief categories.
First: systems which study man as they find him, or such as they
suppose or imagine him to be. Modem 'scientific' psychology or
what is known under that name belongs to this category.
Second: systems which study man not from the point of view of
what he is, or what he seems to be, but from the point of view of
what he may become; that is, from the point of view of his possible
evolution.
These last systems are in reality the original ones, or in any case
the oldest and only they can explain the forgotten origin and the
moaning of psychology.
When we understand the importance of the study of man from
the point of view of his possible evolution, we shall understand that
the first answer to the question:
What is psychology?—should be that psychology is the study of
the principles, laws and facts of man's possible evolution.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

Here, in these lectures, I shall speak only from this point of
view.
Our first question will be—what does evolution of man mean,
and second, are there any special conditions necessary for it?
As regards ordinary modern views on the origin of man and his
previous evolution I must say at once that they cannot be
accepted. We must realise that we know nothing about the origin
of man and we have no proof of man's physical or mental
evolution.
On the contrary, if we take historical mankind; that is,
humanity for ten or fifteen thousand years we may find
unmistakable signs of a higher type of man, whose presence can
be established on the evidence of ancient Monuments and
Memorials which cannot be repeated or imitated by the present
humanity.
As regards prehistoric man or creatures similar in appearance to
man and yet at the same time very different from him, whose
bones are sometimes found in deposits of glacial or pre-glacial
periods, we may accept the quite possible view that these bones
belong to some being quite different from man, which died out
long ago.
Denying previous evolution of man we must deny any possibility
of future mechanical evolution of man;
that is, evolution happening by itself according to laws of heredity
and selection, and without man's conscious efforts and
understanding of his possible evolution.
Our fundamental idea shall be that man as we know him is not
a completed being; that nature develops him only up to a certain
point and then leaves him, either

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

to develop further, by his own efforts and devices, or to live and
die such as he was born, or to degenerate and lose capacity for
development.
Evolution of man in this case will mean the development of
certain inner qualities and features which usually remain
undeveloped, and cannot develop by themselves.
Experience and observation show that this development is
possible only in certain definite conditions, with efforts of a
certain kind on the part of man himself, and with sufficient help
from those who began similar work before and have already
attained a certain degree of development, or at least a certain
knowledge of methods.
We must start with the idea that without efforts evolution is
impossible; without help, it is also impossible.
After this we must understand that in the way of development,
man must become a different being, and we must learn and
understand in what sense and in which direction man must
become a different being;
that is, what a different being means.
Then we must understand that all men cannot develop and
become different beings. Evolution is the question of personal
efforts and in relation to the mass of humanity evolution is the
rare exception. It may sound strange but we must realise that it is
not only rare, but is becoming more and more rare.
Many questions naturally arise from the preceding
statements:—
What does it mean that in the way of evolution man must
become a different being? What does 'different being' mean?
Which inner qualities or features can be developed in man and
how can this be done?
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

Why cannot all men develop and become different
beings?
Why such an injustice?
I shall try to answer these questions and I shall begin with the
last one.
Why cannot all men develop and become different beings?
The answer is very simple. Because they do not want it. Because
they do not know about it and will not understand without a long
preparation what it means, even if they are told.
The chief idea is that in order to become a different being man
must want it very much and for a very long time. A passing desire
or a vague desire based on dissatisfaction with external conditions
will not create a sufficient impulse.
The evolution of man depends on his understanding of what he
may get and what he must give for it.
If man does not want it, or if he does not want it strongly
enough, and does not make necessary efforts, he will never
develop. So there is no injustice in this. Why should man have
what he does not want? If man were forced to become a different
being when he is satisfied with what he is, then this would be
injustice.
Now we must ask ourselves what a different being means. If we
consider all the material we can find that refers to this question,
we find an assertion that in becoming a different being man
acquires many new qualities and powers which he does not
possess now. This is a common assertion which we find in all
kinds of systems admitting the idea of psychological or inner
growth of man.
But this is not sufficient. Even the most detailed
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

descriptions of these new powers will not help us in any way to
understand how they appear and where they come from.
There is a missing link in ordinary known theories, even in
those I already mentioned which are based on the idea of the
possibility of evolution of man.
The truth lies in the fact that before acquiring any new faculties
or powers which man does not know and does not possess now,
he must acquire faculties and powers he also does not possess, but
which he ascribes to himself; that is, he thinks that he knows them
and can use and control them.
This is the missing link, and this is the most important point.
By way of evolution, as described before, that is, a way based on
effort and help, man must acquire qualities which he thinks he
already possesses, but about which he deceives himself.
In order to understand this better, and to know what are these
faculties and powers which man can acquire, both quite new and
unexpected and also those which he imagines that he already
possesses, we must begin with man's general knowledge about
himself.
And here we come at once to a very important fact.
Man does not know himself.
He does not know his own limitations and his own possibilities.
He does not even know to how great an extent he does not know
himself.
Man has invented many machines, and he knows that a
complicated machine needs sometimes years of careful study
before one can use it or control it. But he does not apply this
knowledge to himself, although

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

he himself is a much more complicated machine than any machine
he has invented.
He has all sorts of wrong ideas about himself. First of all he does
not realise that he actually is a machine.
What does it mean that man is a machine?
It means that he has no independent movements, inside or
outside of himself. He is a machine which is brought into motion
by external influences and external impacts. All his movements,
actions, words, ideas, emotions, moods and thoughts are produced
by external influences. By himself, he is just an automaton with a
certain store of memories of previous experiences, and a certain
amount of reserve energy.
We must understand that man can do nothing.
But he does not realise this and ascribes to himself the capacity
to do. This is the first wrong thing that man ascribes to himself.
That must be understood very clearly. Man cannot do.
Everything that man thinks he does, really happens. It happens
exactly as 'it rains,' or 'it thaws.'
In the English language there are no impersonal verbal forms
which can be used in relation to human actions. So we must
continue to say that man thinks, reads, writes, loves, hates, starts
wars, fights, and so on. Actually, all this happens.
Man cannot move, think or speak of his own accord. He is a
marionette pulled here and there by invisible strings. If he
understands this, he can learn more about himself, and possibly
then things may begin to change for him. But if he cannot realise
and understand his utter mechanicalness or if he does not wish to
accept it as a fact, he can learn nothing more, and things cannot
change for him,

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

Man is a machine, but a very peculiar machine. He is a machine
which, in right circumstances, and with right treatment, can know
that he is a machine, and having fully realised this, he may find the
ways to cease to be a machine.
First of all, what man must know is that he is not one;
he is many. He has not one permanent and unchangeable 'I' or
Ego. He is always different. One moment he is one, another
moment he is another, the third moment he is a third, and so on,
almost without an end.
The illusion of unity or oneness is created in man first, by the
sensation of one physical body, by his name, which in normal
cases always remains the same, and third, by a number of
mechanical habits which are implanted in him by education or
acquired by imitation. Having always the same physical sensations,
hearing always the same name and noticing in himself the same
habits and inclinations he had before, he believes himself to be
always the same.
In reality there is no oneness in man and there is no controlling
centre, no permanent 'I' or Ego.
This is the general picture of man:

Every thought, every feeling, every sensation, every desire,
every like and every dislike is an 'I'. These 'I's
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

are not connected and are not co-ordinated in any way. Each of
them depends on the change in external circumstances, and on the
change of impressions.
Some of them mechanically follow some other, and some
appear always accompanied by others. But there is no order and
no system in that.
There are certain groups of 'I's which are naturally connected.
We will speak about these groups later. Now, we must try to
understand that there are groups of 'I's connected only by
accidental associations, accidental memories, or quite imaginary
similarities.
Each of these 'I's represents at every given moment a very small
part of our 'brain,' 'mind', or 'intelligence,' but each of them means
itself to represent the whole. When man says 'I' it sounds as if he
meant the whole of himself, but really even when he himself
thinks that he means it, it is only a passing thought, a passing
mood, or passing desire. In an hour's time he may completely
forget it, and with the same conviction express an opposite
opinion, opposite view, opposite interests. The worst of it is that
man does not remember it. In most cases he believes in the last 'I'
which expressed itself, as long as it lasts: that is, as long as another
'I'—sometimes quite unconnected with the preceding one—does
not express its opinion or its desire louder than the first.
Now let us return to two other questions:
What does development mean? And what does it mean that
man can become a different being? Or, in other words, what kind
of change is possible in man, and how and when does this change
begin?
It has already been said that the change will begin with those
powers and capacities which man ascribes to himself, but which, in
reality, he does not possess.
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

which understood that only man himself can know certain things
in relation to himself.
Applied to the question of consciousness it means that only
man himself can know if his consciousness exists at the moment
or not. That means that the presence 01 absence of consciousness
in man cannot be proven by observation of his external actions.
As I said, this fact was established long ago, but the importance of
it was never fully understood because it was always connected
with the understanding of consciousness as mental process or
mind activity. If man realises that up to the moment of this
realisation he was not conscious, and then forgets this
realisation—or even remembers it—this is not consciousness. It is
only memory of a strong realisation.
Now I want to draw your attention to another fact which has
been missed by all modem psychological schools.
It is the fact that the consciousness in man, whatever it means,
never remains in the same state. It is either there or not. The
highest moments of consciousness create memory. Other
moments man simply does not remember. This more than
anything else produces in man the illusion of continuous
consciousness or continuous awareness.
Some of the modem schools of psychology deny consciousness
altogether, deny even the necessity of such a term, but this is
simply an extravagance of misapprehension. Other schools—if
they can be called by this name—speak about states of
consciousness-—meaning thoughts, feelings, moving impulses and
sensations. This is based on the fundamental mistake of mixing
consciousness with psychic functions. About that we will speak
later.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

In reality modern thought in most cases still relies on the old
formulation, that consciousness has no degrees. General, although
tacit, acceptance of this idea, even though it contradicted many
later discoveries, stopped many possible observations of variations
of consciousness.
The fact is that consciousness has quite visible and observable
degrees, certainly visible and observable in oneself.
First, there is duration: How long one was conscious.
Second, frequency of appearance: how often one became
conscious.
Third, the extent and penetration: of what one was conscious,
which can vary very much with the growth of man.
It we take only the first two, we will be able to understand the
idea of possible evolution of consciousness. This idea is connected
with the most important fact very well known by old
psychological schools, like for instance authors of Philokalia, but
completely missed by European philosophy and psychology of the
last two or three centuries.
This is the fact that consciousness can be made continuous and
controllable by special efforts and special study.
I shall try to explain how consciousness can be studied. Take a
watch and look at the second hand, frying to be aware of yourself,
and concentrating on the thought, 'I am Peter Ouspensky,' 'I am
now here.' Try not to think about anything else, simply follow the
movements of the second hand and be aware of yourself, your
name, your existence and the place where you are. Keep all other
thoughts away.
You will, if you are persistent, be able to do this for

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

two minutes. This is the limit of your consciousness. And if you try
to repeat the experiment soon after, you will find it more difficult
than the first time.
This experiment shows that a man, in his natural state, can with
great effort be conscious of one subject (himself) for two minutes
or less.
The most important deduction one can make after making this
experiment in the right way is that man is not conscious of himself.
The illusion of his being conscious of himself is created by
memory and thought processes.
For instance, a man goes to a theatre. If he is accustomed to it,
he is not especially conscious of being there while he is there,
although he can see things and observe them, enjoy the
performance or dislike it, remember it, remember people he met
and so on.
When he comes home he remembers that he was in the theatre,
and certainly he thinks that he was conscious while he was there.
So he has no doubts about his consciousness and he does not
realise that his consciousness can be completely absent while he
still can act reasonably, think, observe.
For general description, man has possibility of four states of
consciousness. They are: sleep, waking state, self-consciousness and
objective consciousness.
But although he has the possibility of these four states of
consciousness, man actually lives only in two states. one part of his
life passes in sleep, and the other part in what is called 'waking
state,' though in reality his waking state differs very little from
sleep.
In ordinary life, man knows nothing of 'objective consciousness'
and no experiments in this direction are possible. The third state
or 'self-consciousness' man ascribes to himself; that is, he believes
he possesses it,
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

although actually he can be conscious of himself only in very rare
flashes and even then he probably does not recognise it because he
does not know what it would imply if he actually possessed it.
These glimpses of consciousness come in exceptional moments, in
highly emotional states, in moments of danger, in very new and
unexpected circumstances and situations; or sometimes in quite
ordinary moments when nothing in particular happens. But in his
ordinary or 'normal' state, man has no control over them whatever.
As regards our ordinary memory or moments of memory, we
actually remember only moments of consciousness, although we do
not realise that this is so.
What memory means in a technical sense, and different kinds of
memory we possess, I shall explain later. Now I simply want you
to turn your attention to your own observations of your memory.
You will notice that you remember things differently. Some things
you remember quite vividly, some very vaguely and some you do
not remember at all. You only know that they happened.
You will be very astonished when you realise how little you
actually remember. And it happens in this way because you
remember only the moments when you were conscious.
So, in reference to the third state of consciousness, we can say
that man has occasional moments of self-consciousness leaving
vivid memories of circumstances accompanying them but he has
no command over them. They come and go by themselves, being
controlled by external circumstances, and occasional associations
or memories of emotions.
The question arises: Is it possible to acquire command over
these fleeting moments of consciousness, to evoke them more
often, and to keep them longer, or even make

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

them permanent? In other words, is it possible to become conscious?
This is the most important point, and it must be understood at
the very beginning of our study that this point even as a theory
has been entirely missed by all modem psychological schools
without an exception.
For with right methods and the right efforts man can acquire
control of consciousness, and can become conscious of himself with all
that it implies. And what it implies we in our present state do not
even imagine.
Only after this point has been understood does serious study of
psychology become possible.
This study must begin with the investigation of obstacles to
consciousness in ourselves, because consciousness can only begin
to grow when at least some of these obstacles are removed.
In the following lectures, I shall speak about these obstacles, the
greatest of which is our ignorance of ourselves, and our wrong
conviction that we know ourselves at least to a certain extent and
can be sure of ourselves, when in reality we do not know
ourselves at all and cannot be sure of ourselves even in smallest
things.
We must understand now that psychology really means selfstudy. This is the second definition of psychology.
One cannot study psychology as one can study astronomy; that
is, apart from oneself.
And at the same time one must study oneself as one studies any
new and complicated machine. One must know the parts of this
machine, its chief functions, the conditions of right work, the
causes of wrong work, and many other things which are difficult
to describe without using a special language, which it is also
necessary to know in order to be able to study the machine.
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

The human machine has seven different functions:
1. Thinking (or intellect).
2. Feeling (or emotions).
3. Instinctive function (all inner work of the organism).
4. Moving function (all outer work of the organism,
movement in space, and so on).
5. Sex (the function of two principles, male and female, in all
their manifestations).
Besides these there are two more Junctions for which we have no
name in ordinary language and which appear only in higher states
of consciousness; one—higher emotional Junction, which appears in
the state of self-consciousness, and the other, higher mental function,
which appears in the state of objective consciousness. As we are not
in these states of consciousness we cannot study these functions or
experiment with them, and we learn about them only indirectly
from those who have attained or experienced them.
In the religious and philosophical literature of different nations
there are many allusions to the higher states of consciousness and
to higher functions. What creates an additional difficulty in
understanding these allusions is the lack of division between the
higher states of consciousness. What is called samadhi or ecstatic
state or illumination, or, in more recent works cosmic consciousness', may refer to one and may refer to another—sometimes to
experiences of self-consciousness and sometimes to experiences of
objective consciousness. And strange though it may seem we have
more material for judging about the highest state; that is, objective
consciousness, than about the intermediate state; that is, selfconsciousness, although the former may come only after the latter.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

Self-study must begin with the study of the four functions;
thinking, feeling, instinctive function and moving function. Sex
functions can be studied only much later;
that is, when these four functions are already sufficiently
understood. Contrary to some modern theories the sex function is
really posterior; that is, it appears later in life when the first four
functions are already fully manifested and is conditioned by them.
Therefore, the study of the sex function can be useful only when
the first four functions are fully known in all their manifestations.
At the same time it must be understood that any serious
irregularity or abnormality in the sex function makes selfdevelopment and even self-study impossible.
So now we must try to understand the four chief functions.
I will take it for granted that it is clear to you what I mean by
the intellectual or thinking function. All mental processes are
included here: realisation of an impression, formation of
representations and concepts, reasoning, comparison, affirmation,
negation, formation of words, speech, imagination, and so on.
The second function is feeling or emotions: joy, sorrow, fear,
astonishment, and so on. Even if you are sure that it is clear to you
how, and in what, emotions differ from thoughts I should advise
you to verify all your views in regard to this. We mix thought and
feelings in our ordinary thinking and speaking; but for the
beginning of self-study it is necessary to know clearly which is
which.
The two functions following, instinctive and moving, will take
longer to understand, because in no system of

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

Ordinary psychology are these functions described and divided in
the right way.
The words 'instinct,' 'instinctive' are generally used in the wrong
sense and very often in no sense at all. In particular, to instinct are
generally ascribed external functions which are in reality moving
functions, and sometimes emotional.
Instinctive function in man includes in itself four different classes
of functions:
First: All the inner work of the organism, all physiology so to
speak; digestion and assimilation of food, breathing, circulation of
the blood, all the work of inner organs, the building of new cells,
the elimination of worked out materials, the work of glands of
inner secretion, and so on.
Second: The so-called five senses: sight, hearing, smell, taste,
touch, and all other senses such as the sense of weight, of
temperature, of dryness or of moisture, and so on; that is, all
indifferent sensations—sensations which by themselves are neither
pleasant nor unpleasant.
Third: All physical emotions, that is, all physical sensations
which are either pleasant or unpleasant. All kinds of pain or
unpleasant feeling such as unpleasant taste or unpleasant smell,
and all kinds of physical pleasure, such as pleasant taste, pleasant
smell and so on.
Fourth: All reflexes, even the most complicated, such as
laughter and yawning; all kinds of physical memory such as
memory of taste, memory of smell, memory of pain, which are in
reality inner reflexes.
Moving function includes in itself all external movements, such
as walking, writing, speaking, eating and memories of them. To
moving function also belong those movements which in ordinary
language are called 'inDownloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

stinctive,' such as catching a falling object without thinking.
The difference between the instinctive and the moving function
is very clear and can be easily understood if one simply remembers
that all instinctive functions without exception are inherent and
that there is no necessity to learn them in order to use them;
whereas on the other hand, none of the moving functions are
inherent and one has to learn them all as a child learns to walk, or
as one learns to write or to draw.
Besides these normal moving functions, there are also some
strange moving functions which represent useless work of the
human machine not intended by nature, but which occupy a very
large place in man's life and use a great quantity of his energy.
These are: formation of dreams, imagination, day-dreaming, talking
with oneself, all talking for talking's sake, and generally, all
uncontrolled and uncontrollable manifestations.
The four functions—intellectual, emotional, instinctive and
moving—must first be understood in all their manifestations and
later they must be observed in oneself. Such self-observation, that
is, observation on the right basis, with a preliminary understanding
of the states of consciousness and of different functions,
constitutes the basis of self-study; that is, the beginning of
psychology.
It is very important to remember that in observing different
functions it is useful to observe at the same time their relation to
different states of consciousness.
Let us take the three states of consciousness—sleep, waking
state, and possible glimpses of elf-consciousness, and the four
functions—thinking, feeling, instinctive and

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

moving. All four functions can manifest themselves in sleep, but
their manifestations are desultory and unreliable; they cannot be
used in any way, they just go by themselves. In the state of waking
consciousness or relative consciousness, they can to a certain
extent serve for our orientation. Their results can be compared,
verified, straightened out, and although they may create many
illusions, still in our ordinary state we have nothing else and must
make of them what we can. If we knew the quantity of wrong
observations, wrong theories, wrong deductions and conclusions
made in this state, we should cease to believe ourselves altogether.
But men do not realise how deceptive their observations and their
theories can be and they continue to believe in them. It is this
that keeps man from observing the rare moments when their
functions manifest themselves in connection with glimpses of the
third state of consciousness; that is, of self-consciousness.
All this means that each of the four functions can manifest
itself in each of the three states of consciousness. But the results
are quite different. When we learn to observe these results and
their difference, we shall understand the right relation between
functions and states of consciousness.
But before even considering the difference in function in
relation to states of consciousness, it is necessary to understand
that man's consciousness and man's functions are quite different
phenomena, of quite different nature and depending on different
causes and that one can exist without the other. Functions can
exist without consciousness and consciousness can exist without
functions.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

SECOND LECTURE

CONTINUING OUR study of man, we must now speak with more

detail about the different states of consciousness.
As I have already said, there are four states of consciousness
possible for man: Sleep, 'waking consciousness,' self-consciousness
and 'objective consciousness';
but he lives only in two: partly in sleep and partly in what is
sometimes called 'waking consciousness.' It is as though he had a
four-storied house, but lived only in the two lower stories.
The first, or the lowest state of consciousness, is sleep. This is a
purely subjective and passive state. Man is surrounded by dreams.
All his psychic functions work without any direction. There is no
logic, no sequence, no cause and no result in dreams. Purely
subjective pictures—either reflections of former experiences or
reflections of vague perceptions of the moment, such as sounds
reaching the sleeping man, sensations coming from body, slight
pains, sensations of muscular tension— fly through the mind,
leaving only a very slight trace on the memory and more often,
leaving no trace at all.
The second degree of consciousness comes when man awakes.
This second state, the state in which we are now, that is, in which
we work, talk, imagine ourselves conscious beings, and so forth,
we often call 'waking consciousness' or 'clear consciousness' but
really it should be called 'waking sleep' or 'relative consciousness.'
This last term will be explained later.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

It is necessary to understand here that the first state of consciousness,
that is, sleep, does not disappear when the second state arrives, that is,
when man awakes. Sleep remains there, with all its dreams and
impressions, only a more critical attitude towards one's own impressions,
more connected thoughts, more disciplined actions become added to it,
and because of the vividness of sense impressions, desires and feelings—
particularly the feeling of contradiction or impossibility, which is entirely
absent in sleep—dreams become invisible exactly as the stars and moon
become invisible in the glare of the sun. But they are all there, and they
often influence all our thoughts, feelings and actions—sometimes even
more than the actual perceptions of the moment.
In connection with this I must say at once that I do not mean what is
called in modern psychology 'the subconscious' or the 'subconscious
mind.' These are simply wrong expressions, wrong terms, which mean
nothing and do not refer to any real facts. There is nothing permanently
subconscious in us because there is nothing permanently conscious; and
there is no 'subconscious mind' for the very simple reason that there is
no 'conscious mind.' Later you will see how this mistake occurred and
how this wrong terminology came into being, and became almost
generally accepted.
But let us return to the states of consciousness which really exist. The
first is sleep. The second is 'waking sleep' or 'relative consciousness.'
The first, as I have said, is a purely subjective state. The second is less
subjective; man already distinguishes 'I' and 'not I' in the sense of his
body and objects different from his body, and he can, to a certain extent,
orientate among them and know their position and

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

qualities. But it cannot be said that man is awake in this state,
because he is very strongly influenced by dreams, and really lives
more in dreams than in fact. All the absurdities and all the
contradictions of people, and of human life in general, become
explained when we realise that people live in sleep, do everything
in sleep, and do not know that they are asleep.
It is useful to remember that this is the inner meaning of many
ancient doctrines. The best known to us is Christianity, or the
Gospel teaching, in which, the idea that men live in sleep and must
first of all awake, is the basis of all the explanations of human life,
although it is very rarely understood as it should be understood, in
this case literally.
But the question is, how can a man awake?
The Gospel teaching demands awakening, but does not say how
to awaken.
But the psychological study of consciousness shows that only
when a man realises that he is asleep, is it possible to say that he is
on the way to awakening. He never can awaken without first
realising his sleep.
These two states, sleep and waking sleep, are the only two
states of consciousness in which man lives. Besides them there are
two states of consciousness possible for man, but they become
accessible to a man only after a hard and prolonged struggle.
These two higher states of consciousness are called 'selfconsciousness' and 'objective consciousness.'
We generally think that we possess self-consciousness, that is,
that we are conscious of ourselves, or in any case that we can be
conscious of ourselves, at any moment we wish, but in truth 'selfconsciousness' is a state which we
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

ascribe to ourselves without any right. 'Objective consciousness' is a
state about which we know nothing.
Self consciousness is a state in which man becomes objective
towards himself, and objective consciousness is a state in which he
comes into contact with the real, or objective world from which
he is now shut off by the senses, dreams and subjective states of
consciousness.
Another definition of the four states of consciousness can be
made from the point of view of the possible cognition of truth.
In the first state of consciousness, that is, in sleep, we cannot
know anything of the truth. Even if some real perceptions or
feelings come to us, they become mixed with dreams, and in the
state of sleep we cannot distinguish between dreams and reality.
In the second state of consciousness, that is, in waking sleep, we
can only know relative truth, and from this comes the term
relative consciousness.
In the third state of consciousness, that is, the state of selfconsciousness, we can know the full truth about ourselves.
In the fourth state of consciousness, that is, in the state of
objective consciousness, we are supposed to be able to know the
full truth about everything: we can study 'things in themselves,' 'the
world as it is.'
This is so far from us that we cannot even think about it in the
right way, and we must try to understand that even glimpses of
objective consciousness can only come in the fully developed state
of self-consciousness.
In the state of sleep we can have glimpses of relative
consciousness. In the state of relative consciousness we can have
glimpses of self-consciousness. But if we want to have more
prolonged periods of self-consciousness and

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

not merely glimpses, we must understand that they cannot come
by themselves, they need will action. This means that frequency
and duration of moments of self-consciousness depend on the
command one has over oneself. So it means that consciousness
and will are almost one and the same thing, or, in any case aspects
of the same thing.
At this point, it must be understood that the first obstacle in
the way of the development of self-consciousness in man, is his
conviction that he already possesses self-consciousness or at any
rate, that he can have it at any time he likes. It is very difficult to
persuade a man that he is not conscious and cannot be conscious
at will. It is particularly difficult because here nature plays a very
funny trick.
If you ask a man if he is conscious or if you say to him that he
is not conscious, he will answer that he is conscious and that it is
absurd to say that he is not, because he hears and understands you.
And he will be quite right, although at the same time quite wrong.
This is nature's trick. He will be right because your question or
your remark has made him vaguely conscious for a moment. Next
moment consciousness will disappear. But he will remember what
you said and what he answered, and he will certainly consider
himself conscious.
In reality, acquiring self-consciousness means long and hard
work. How can a man agree to this work if he thinks he already
possesses the very thing which is promised him as the result of
long and hard work? Naturally a man will not begin this work and
will not consider it necessary until he becomes convinced that he
possesses neither self-consciousness nor all that is connected with
it, that is, unity or individuality, permanent 'I' and will.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

This brings us to the question of schools, because methods for
the development of self-consciousness, unity, permanent 'I' and will,
can be given only by special schools. That must be clearly
understood. Men on the level of relative consciousness cannot find
these methods by themselves;
and these methods cannot be described in books or taught in
ordinary schools for the very simple reason that they are different
for different people, and there is no universal method equally
applicable to all.
In other words, this means that men who want to change their
state of consciousness need a school. But first, they must realise
their need. As long as they think they can do something by
themselves they will not be able to make any use of a school, even
if they find it. Schools exist only for those who need them, and
who know that they need them.
The idea of schools—the study of the kinds of schools that may
exist, the study of school principles and school methods—
occupies a very important place in the study of that psychology
which is connected with the idea of evolution; because without a
school there can be no evolution. One cannot even start, because
one does not know how to start: still less can one continue or
attain anything.
This means that having got rid of the first illusion, that one
already has everything one can have, one must get rid of the
second illusion that one can get anything by oneself; because by
oneself one can get nothing.
These lectures are not a school—not even the beginning of a
school. A school requires a much higher pressure of work. But in
these lectures I can give to those who wish to listen, some ideas as
to how schools work and how they can be found.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

I gave before two definitions of psychology.
First, I said that psychology is the study of the possible
evolution of man, and second, that psychology is the study of
oneself.
I meant that only a psychology which investigates the evolution
of man is worth studying, and that a psychology which is occupied
with only one phase of man, without knowing anything about his
other phases, is obviously not complete, and cannot have any
value, even in a purely scientific sense, that is, from the point of
view of experiment and observation. For the present phase, as
studied by ordinary psychology, in reality does not exist as
something separate and consists of many sub-divisions which lead
from lower phases to higher phases. Moreover, the same experiment and observation show that one cannot study psychology as
one can study any other science not directly connected with
oneself. One has to begin the study of psychology with oneself.
Putting together, first what we may know about the next phase
in the evolution of man, that is, that it will mean acquiring
consciousness, inner unity, permanent ego and will, and second,
certain material that we can get by self-observation, that is,
realisation of the absence in us of many powers and faculties
which we ascribe to ourselves, we come to a new difficulty in
understanding the meaning of psychology, and to the necessity for
a new definition.
The two definitions given in the previous lectures are not
sufficient because man by himself does not know what evolution
is possible for him, does not see

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

where he stands at present and ascribes to himself features
belonging to higher phases of evolution. In fact, he cannot study
himself, being unable to distinguish between the imaginary and the
real in himself.
What is lying?
As it is understood in ordinary language, lying means distorting
or in some cases, hiding the truth, or what people believe to be the
truth. This lying plays a very important part in life, but there are
much worse forms of lying, when people do not know that they
lie. I said in the last lecture that we cannot know the truth in our
present state, and can only know the truth in the state of objective
consciousness. How then can we lie? There seems to be a
contradiction here, but in reality there is none. We cannot know
the truth but we can pretend that we know. And this is lying.
Lying fills all our life. People pretend that they know all sorts of
things: about God, about the future life, about the universe, about
the origin of man, about evolution, about everything; but in reality
they do not know anything, even about themselves. And every
time they speak about something they do not know as though they
knew it, they lie. Consequently the study of lying becomes of the
first importance in psychology.
And it may lead even to the third definition of psychology
which is: the study of lying.
Psychology is particularly concerned with the lies a man says
and thinks about himself. These lies make the study of man very
difficult. Man, as he is, is not a genuine article. He is an imitation of
something, and a very bad imitation.
Imagine a scientist on some remote planet who

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

has received from the earth specimens of artificial flowers, without
knowing anything about real flowers. It will be extremely difficult
for him to define them— to explain their shape, their colour, the
material from which they are made, that is, wire, cotton-wool and
coloured paper—and to classify them in any way.
Psychology stands in a very similar position in relation to man.
It has to study an artificial man, without knowing the real man.
Obviously, it cannot be easy to study a being such as man, who
does not himself know what is real and what is imaginary in him.
So psychology must begin with a division between the real and
the imaginary in man.
It is impossible to study man as a whole, because man is divided
into two parts: one part which, in some cases, can be almost all
real, and the other part which, in some cases, can be almost all
imaginary. In the majority of ordinary men these two parts are
intermixed, and cannot be easily distinguished, although they are
both there, and both have their own particular meaning and
effect.
In the system we are studying, these two parts are called essence
and personality.
Essence is what is born in man.
Personality is what is acquired. Essence is what is his own.
Personality is what is not his own. Essence cannot be lost, cannot
be changed or injured as easily as personality. Personality can be
changed almost completely with the change of circumstances; it
can be lost or easily injured.
If I try to describe what essence is, I must, first of all, say that it
is the basis of man's physical and mental

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

make-up. For instance, one man is naturally what is called a good
sailor, another is a bad sailor, one has a musical ear, another has
not, one has a capacity for languages, another has not. This is
essence.
Personality is all that is learned in one or another way, in
ordinary language, 'consciously' or 'unconsciously.' In most cases
'unconsciously' means by imitation which, as a matter of fact,
plays a very important part in the building of personality. Even in
instinctive functions, which naturally should be free from
personality, there are usually many so-called 'acquired tastes,' that
is, all sorts of artificial likes and dislikes, all of which are acquired
by imitation and imagination. These artificial likes and dislikes
play a very important and very disastrous part in man's life. By
nature, man should like what is good for him and dislike what is
bad for him. But this is so, only as long as essence dominates
personality, as it should dominate it, in other words, when a man
is healthy and normal. When personality begins to dominate
essence and when man becomes less healthy, he begins to like
what is bad for him and to dislike what is good for him.
This is connected with the chief thing that can be wrong in the
mutual relations of essence and personality.
Normally, essence must dominate personality and then
personality can be quite useful. But if personality dominates
essence, this produces wrong results of many kinds.
It must be understood that personality is also necessary for
man; one cannot live without personality and only with essence.
But essence and personality must grow parallel, and the one must
not outgrow the other.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

Cases of essence outgrowing personality may occur among
uneducated people. These so-called simple people may be very
good, and even clever, but they are incapable of development in
the same way as people with more developed personality.
Cases of personality outgrowing essence are often to be found
among more cultured people, and in such cases, essence remains in
a half-grown or half-developed state.
This means that with a quick and early growth of personality,
growth of essence can practically stop at a very early age, and as a
result we see men and women externally quite grown-up, but
whose essence remains at the age of ten or twelve.
There are many conditions in modern life which greatly favour
this under-development of essence. For instance, the infatuation
with sport, particularly with games, can very effectively stop the
development of essence, and sometimes at such an early age that
essence is never fully able to recover later.
This shows that essence cannot be regarded as connected only
with the physical constitution, in the simple meaning of the idea.
In order to explain more clearly what essence means, I must again
return to the study of functions.
I said in the last lecture that the study of man begins with the
study of four functions: intellectual, emotional, moving and
instinctive. From ordinary psychology, and from ordinary thinking,
we know that the intellectual functions, thoughts, and so on, are
controlled or produced by a certain centre which we call ' mind' or
'intellect,' or 'the brain.' And this is quite

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

right. Only, to be fully right, we must understand that other
functions are also controlled each by its own mind or centre. Thus,
from the point of view of the system, there are four minds or
centres which control our ordinary actions: intellectual mind,
emotional mind, moving mind and instinctive mind. In further
references to them we shall call them centres. Each centre is quite
independent of the others, has its own sphere of action, its own
powers, and its own ways of development.
Centres, that is, their structure, capacities, strong sides and
defects, belong to essence. Their contents, that is, all that a centre
acquires, belong to personality. The contents of centres will be
explained later.
As I have already said, personality is as equally necessary for the
development of man as is essence, only it must stand in its right
place. This is hardly possible, because personality is full of wrong
ideas about itself. It does not wish to stand in its right place,
because its right place is secondary and subordinate;
and it does not wish to know the truth about itself, for to know
the truth will mean abandoning its falsely dominant position, and
occupying the inferior position which rightly belongs to it.
The wrong relative positions of essence and personality
determine the present disharmonious state of man. And the only
way to get out of this disharmonious state is by self-knowledge.
To know oneself—this was the first principle and the first
demand of old psychological schools. We still remember these
words, but have lost their meaning. We think that to know
ourselves, means to know our peculiarities, our desires, our tastes,
our capacities and our intentions, when in reality it means to
know our-

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

selves as machines, that is, to know the structure of one's machine, its
parts, functions of different parts, the conditions governing their work
and so on. We realise in a general way that we cannot know any
machine without studying it. We must remember this in relation to
ourselves and must study our own machines as machines. The means of
study is self-observation. There is no other way and no one can do this
work for us. We must do it ourselves. But before this we must learn how
to observe. I mean, we must understand the technical side of
observation: we must know that it is necessary to observe different
functions and distinguish between them, remembering, at the same time,
about different states of consciousness, about our sleep, and about the
many I's in us.
Such observations will very soon give results. First of all a man will
notice that he cannot observe everything he finds in himself impartially.
Some things may please him, other things will annoy him, irritate him,
even horrify him. And it cannot be otherwise. Man cannot study himself
as a remote star, or as a curious fossil. Quite naturally he will like in
himself what helps his development and dislike what makes his development more difficult, or even impossible. This means that very soon
after starting to observe himself, he will begin to distinguish useful
features and harmful features in himself, that is, useful or harmful from
the point of view of his possible self-knowledge, his possible awakening,
his possible development. He will see sides of himself which can
become conscious, and sides which cannot become conscious and must
be eliminated. In observing himself, he must always remember that his
self-study is the first step towards his possible evolution.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

Now we must see what are those harmful features that man finds in
himself.
Speaking in general they are all mechanical manifestations. The first as
has already been said, is lying. Lying is unavoidable in mechanical life. No
one can escape it and the more one thinks that one is free from lying, the
more one is in it. Life, as it is could not exist without lying. But from the
psychological side, lying has a different meaning. It means speaking about
things one does not know, and even cannot know, as though one knows and
can know.
You must understand that I do not speak from any moral point of
view. We have not yet come to questions of what is good, and what is
bad, by itself. I speak only from a practical point of view, of what is
useful and what is harmful to self-study and self-development.
Starting in this way, man very soon learns to discover signs by which
he can know harmful manifestations in himself. He discovers that the
more he can control a manifestation, the less harmful it can be, and that
the less he can control it, that is, the more mechanical it is, the more
harmful it can become.
When man understands this he becomes afraid of lying, again not on
moral grounds, but on the grounds that he cannot control his lying, and
that lying controls him, that is, his other functions.
The second dangerous feature he finds in himself is imagination. Very
soon after starting his observation of himself he comes to the conclusion
that the chief obstacle to observation is imagination. He wishes to
observe something, but instead of that, imagination starts in him on the
same subject, and he forgets about observation. Very soon he realises
that people ascribe

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

to the word imagination a quite artificial and quite undeserved
meaning in the sense of creative or selective faculty. He realises that
imagination is a destructive faculty, that he can never control it and
that it always carries him away from his more conscious decisions
in a direction in which he had no intention of going. Imagination is
almost as bad as lying, it is, in fact, lying to oneself. Man starts to
imagine something in order to please himself, and very soon he
begins to believe what he imagines, or at least some of it.
Further, or even before that, one finds many very dangerous
effects in the expression of negative emotions. The term 'negative
emotions' means all emotions of violence or depression: self-pity,
anger, suspicion, fear, annoyance, boredom, mistrust, jealousy and
so on. Ordinarily, one accepts this expression of negative emotions
as quite natural and even necessary. Very often people call it
'sincerity.' Of course it has nothing to do with sincerity; it is simply
a sign of weakness in man, a sign of bad temper and of incapacity
to keep his grievances to himself. Man realises this when he tries
to oppose it. And by this he learns another lesson. He realises that
in relation to mechanical manifestations it is not enough to
observe them, it is necessary to resist them, because without
resisting them one cannot observe them. They happen so quickly,
so habitually and so imperceptibly, that one cannot notice them if
one does not make sufficient efforts to create obstacles for them.
After the expression of negative emotions one notices in one self
or in other people another curious mechanical feature. This is
talking. There is no harm in talking by itself. But with some
people, especially with those who notice it least, it really becomes
a vice. They talk all the

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

time, everywhere they happen to be, while working, while
travelling, even while sleeping. They never stop talking to
someone if there is someone to talk to, and if there is no one, they
talk to themselves.
This too must not only be observed, but resisted as much as
possible. With unresisted talking one cannot observe anything, and
all the results of a man's observations will immediately evaporate
in talking.
The difficulties he has in observing these four manifestations—
lying, imagination, the expression of negative emotions and
unnecessary talking—will show man his utter mechanicalness, and
the impossibility even of struggling against this mechanicalness
without help, that is, without new knowledge and without actual
assistance. For even if a man has received certain material, he forgets to use it, forgets to observe himself; in other words, he falls
asleep again and must always be awakened.
This 'falling asleep' has certain definite features of its own,
unknown, or at least unregistered and unnamed, in ordinary
psychology. These features need special study.
There are two of them. The first is called identification.
'Identifying' or 'identification.' is a curious state in which man
passes more than half of his life. He 'identifies' with everything:
with what he says, what he feels, what he believes, what he does
not believe, what he wishes, what he does not wish, what attracts
him, what repels him. Everything absorbs him, and he cannot
separate himself from the idea, the feeling or the object that
absorbed him. This means that in the state of identification man is
incapable of looking impartially on the object of his identification.
It is difficult to find the smallest thing with which man is unable
to 'identify.'
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

At the same time, in a state of identification, man has even less
control over his mechanical reactions than at any other time. Such
manifestations as lying, imagination, the expression of negative
emotions and constant talking need identification. They cannot
exist without identification. If man could get rid of identification,
he could get rid of many useless and foolish manifestations.
Identification, its meaning, causes and results, is extremely well
described in the Philokalia which was mentioned in the first
lecture. But no trace of understanding of it can be found in
modem psychology. It is a quite forgotten 'psychological
discovery.'
The second sleep-producing state, akin to identification, is
considering. Actually, 'considering' is identification with people. It
is a state in which man constantly worries about what other
people think of him; whether they give him his due, whether they
admire him enough and so on, and so on. 'Considering' plays a very
important part in everyone's life, but in some people it becomes
an obsession. All their lives are filled with considering, that is,
worry, doubt and suspicion, and there remains no place for
anything else.
The myth of the 'inferiority complex' and other 'complexes' is
created by the vaguely realised but not understood phenomenon
of 'identification' and 'considering.'
Both 'identifying' and 'considering' must be observed most
seriously. Only full knowledge of them can diminish them. If one
cannot see them in oneself, one can easily see them in other
people. But one must remember that one in no way differs from
others. In this sense all people are equal.
Returning now to what was said before, we must try to
understand more clearly how the development of

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

man must begin, and in what way self-study can help this
beginning.
From the very start we meet with a difficulty in our language.
For instance, we want to speak about man from the point of view
of evolution. But the word 'man* in ordinary language does not
admit of any variation or any gradation. Man who is never
conscious and never suspects it, man who is struggling to become
conscious, man who is fully conscious—it is all the same for our
language. It is always 'man* in every case. In order to avoid this
difficulty and to help the student in classifying his new ideas, the
system divides man into seven categories.
The first three categories are practically on the same level.
Man No. 1, a man in whom the moving or instinctive centres
predominate over the intellectual and emotional, that is, Physical
Man.
Man No. 2, a man in whom the emotional centre predominates
over the intellectual, moving and instinctive. Emotional man.
Man No. 3, a man in whom the intellectual centre
predominates over the emotional, moving and instinctive.
Intellectual man.
In ordinary life we meet only these three categories of man.
Each one of us and everyone we know is either No. 1, No. 2, or
No. 3. There are higher categories of man, but men are not born
already belonging to these higher categories. They are all born No.
1, No. 2, No. 3 and can reach higher categories only through
schools.
Man No. 4 is not born as such. He is a product of school
culture. He differs from man No. 1, No. 2, and No. 3 by his
knowledge of himself, by his understanding

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

of his position and, as it is expressed technically, by his having
acquired a permanent centre of gravity. This last means that the
idea of acquiring unity, consciousness, permanent 'I' and will, that
is, the idea of his development has already become for him more
important than his other interests.
It must be added to the characteristics of man No. 4, that his
functions and centres are more balanced, in a way in which they
could not be balanced without work on himself, according to
school principles and methods.
Man No. 5 is a man who has acquired unity and selfconsciousness. He is different from ordinary man, because, in him,
one of the higher centres already works, and he has many
functions and powers that an ordinary man, that is, man No. 1, 2
and 3 does not possess.
Man No. 6 is a man who as acquired objective consciousness.
Another higher centre works in him. He possesses many more
new faculties and powers, beyond the understanding of an
ordinary man.
Man No. 7 is a man who has attained all that a man can attain.
He has a permanent 'I' and free will. He can control all the states of
consciousness in himself and he already cannot lose anything he
has acquired. According to another description, he is immortal
within the limits of the solar system.
Understanding of this division of man into seven categories is
very important, for the division has very many applications in all
possible ways of studying human activity. It gives, in the hands of
those who understand it, a very strong and very fine instrument or
tool for the definition of manifestations which, without it, are
impossible to define.
Take, for instance, the general concepts of religion, art,
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

science and philosophy. Beginning with religion we can see at once
that there must be a religion of man No. 1, that is, all forms of
fetishism, no matter how they are called; a religion of man No. 2,
that is, emotional, sentimental religion, passing sometimes into
fanaticism, the crudest forms of intolerance, persecution of
heretics and so on; a religion of man No. 3, that is theoretical,
scholastic religion, full of argument about words, forms, rituals,
which become more important than anything else; a religion of
man No. 4, that is, the religion of man who works for selfdevelopment; religion of man No. 5, that is, the religion of a man
who has attained unity and can see and know many things that
man No. 1, 2, and 3 can neither see nor know; then a religion of
man No. 6 and a religion of man No. 7, about neither of which can
we know anything.
The same division applies to art, science and philosophy. There
must be an art of man No. 1, an art of man No. 2, an art of man
No. 3; science of man No. 1, science of man No. 2, science of man
No. 3, science of man No. 4 and so on. You must try to find
examples of these for yourselves.
This expansion of concepts greatly enlarges our possibility of
finding right solutions to many of our problems.
And this means that the system gives us the possibility of
studying a new language, that is, new for us, which will connect
for us ideas of different categories which are, in reality, united, and
divide ideas of seemingly the same categories which are, in reality,
different. The division of the word 'man' into seven words: Man
No. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, with all that follows, is an example of this
new language.
This gives us the fourth definition of psychology as the

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

study of a new language. And this new language is a universal
language, which people sometimes try to find or invent.
The expression, 'a universal language' or 'philosophical
language,' must not be taken in a metaphorical sense. The language
is universal in the same sense as mathematical symbols are
universal. And besides that it includes in itself all that people can
think about. Even the few words of this language which have been
explained, give you the possibility of thinking and speaking with
more precision than is possible in ordinary language, using any of
the existing scientific or philosophical terminologies and
nomenclatures.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

THIRD LECTURE

THE IDEA that man is a machine is not a new one. It is really the

only scientific view possible; that is, a view based on experiment
and observation. A very good definition of man's mechanicalness
was given in the so-called 'psycho-physiology' of the second part
of the XIXth century. Man was regarded as incapable of any
movement without receiving external impressions. Scientists of
that time maintained that if it were possible to deprive man, from
birth, of all outer and inner impressions and still keep him alive,
he would not be able to make the smallest movement.
Such an experiment is, of course, impossible even with an
animal, because the process of maintaining life, breathing, eating
and so on, will produce all sorts of impressions which will start
different reflectory movements first, and then awaken the moving
centre.
But this idea is interesting because it shows clearly that the
activity of the machine depends on external impressions, and
begins with responses to these impressions.
Centres in the machine are perfectly adjusted to receive each
its own kinds of impressions and to respond to them in a
corresponding way. And when centres work rightly, it is possible
to calculate the work of the machine and to foresee and foretell
many future happenings and responses in the machine, as well as
to study them and even direct them.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

But unfortunately, centres, even in what is called a healthy and
normal man, very rarely work as they should.
The cause of this is that centres are made so that, in a certain
way, they can replace one another. In the original plan of Nature
the purpose of this was, undoubtedly, to make work of centres
continuous and to create a safeguard against possible interruptions
in the work of the machine, because in some cases an interruption
could be fatal.
But the capacity of centres to work for one another in an
untrained and undeveloped machine—as all our machines are—
becomes excessive and, as a result, the machine only rarely works
with each centre doing its right work. Almost every minute one or
another centre leaves its own work and tries to do the work of
another centre which, in its turn, tries to do the work of a third
centre.
I said that centres can replace one another to a certain extent,
but not completely, and inevitably in such cases they work in a
much less effective way. For instance moving centre can, up to a
point, imitate the work of intellectual centre, but it can only
produce very vague and disconnected thoughts as, for example, in
dreams and in day-dreaming. In its turn, the intellectual centre can
work for the moving centre. Try to write, for instance, thinking
about every letter you are going to write and how you will write
it. You can make experiments of this kind in trying to use your
mind to do something which your hands or your legs can do
without its help for instance, walk down a staircase noticing every
movement, or do some habitual work with your hands, calculating
and preparing every small movement by mind. You will
immediately see how much more difficult the

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

work will become, how much slower and how much more
clumsy the intellectual centre is than the moving centre. You can
see this also when you learn some kind of new movement—
suppose you learn the use of the typewriter or any kind of new
physical work—or take a soldier doing rifle drill. For some time
in all your (or his) movements you will depend on the
intellectual centre, and only after some time will they begin to
pass to moving centre.
Everyone knows the relief when movements become habitual,
when the adjustments become automatic, and when there is no
need to think and calculate every movement all the time. This
means that movement has passed to the moving centre, where it
normally belongs.
The instinctive centre can work for the emotional, and the
emotional can occasionally work for all other centres. And in
some cases the intellectual centre has to work for the instinctive
centre, although it can only do a very small part of its work, the
part which is connected with visible movements, such as the
movement of the chest during breathing. It is very dangerous to
interfere with normal functions of the instinctive centre, as for
instance in artificial breathing, which is sometimes described a
yogi breathing, and which must never be undertaker without the
advice and observation of a competent and experienced teacher.
Returning to the wrong work of centres, I must say that this
fills up practically all our life. Our dull impressions, our vague
impressions, our lack of impressions, our slow understanding of
many things, very often our identifying and our considering, even
our lying, all these depend on the wrong work of centres.
The idea of the wrong work of centres does not enter

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

into our ordinary thinking and ordinary knowledge, and we do not
realise how much harm it does to us, how much energy we spend
unnecessarily in this way and the difficulties into which this
wrong work of centres leads us.
Insufficient understanding of the wrong work of our machine is
usually connected with the false notion of our unity. When we
understand how much divided we are in. ourselves, we begin to
realise the danger that can lie in the fact that one part of ourselves
works instead of mother part, without our knowing it.
In the way of self-study and self-observation it is necessary to
study and observe not only the right work of centres, but also the
wrong work of centres. It is necessary to know all kinds of wrong
work and the particular features of the wrong work belonging to
particular individuals. It is impossible to know oneself without
knowing one's defects and wrong features. And, in. addition to
general defects belonging to everyone, each of us has his own
particular defects belonging only to himself, and they also have to
be studied at the right time.
I pointed out in the beginning that the idea that man is a
machine brought into motion by external influences is really and
truly a scientific idea. What science does not know is:
First, that the human machine does not work up to its standard,
and actually works much below its normal standard; that is, not
with its full powers, not with all its parts; and
Second, that in spite of many obstacles it is capable of
developing and creating for itself quite different standards of
receptivity and action. We shall now speak of the conditions
necessary for

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

development because it must be remembered that although
development is possible, it is at the same time very rare and
requires a great number of external and internal conditions.
What are these conditions?
The first of these conditions is that man must understand his
position, his difficulties and his possibilities and must have either
a very strong desire to get out of his present state or have a very
great interest for the new, for the unknown state which must come
with the change. Speaking shortly, he must be either very strongly
repelled by his present state or very strongly attracted by the
future state that may be attained.
Further, one must have a certain preparation. A man must be
able to understand what he is told.
Also, he must be in right conditions externally, he must have
sufficient free time for study and must live in circumstances
which make study possible.
It is impossible to enumerate all the conditions which are
necessary. But they include among other things a school. And
school implies such social and political conditions in the given
country in which a school can exist, because a school cannot exist
in any conditions; and a more or less ordered life and a certain
level of culture and personal freedom are necessary for the
existence of a school. Our time is particularly difficult in this
respect. Schools in the East are disappearing very quickly. In many
countries they are absolutely impossible. For instance, no school
could exist in Bolshevik Russia, or in Hitler's Germany, or in
Mussolini's Italy, or in Kemal's Turkey.
I quoted some verses from the Laws of Manu referring to this
subject in the New Model of the Universe.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

From the rules for a Snataka (householder):
61. He must not live in a country governed by Sudras, nor in one
inhabited by impious men, nor in one conquered by heretics, nor
one abounding with men of lower castes. 79. He must not be in
the company of outcastes, nor of Kandalas, the lowest of men,
nor of Pukkases, nor of idiots, nor of arrogant men, nor of men of
low class, nor of Antyavasayins (grave-diggers). Chapter VIII.
22. A kingdom peopled mostly by Sudras filled with godless men
and deprived of twice-born inhabitants, will soon wholly
perish, stricken by hunger and disease.
These ideas of the Laws of Manu are very interesting because
they give us a basis on which we can judge different political and
social conditions from the point of view of school-work, and to see
which conditions are really progressive, and which bring only the
destruction of all real values, although their adherents pretend
that these conditions are progressive and even manage to deceive
quantities of weak-minded people.
But external conditions do not depend on us. To a certain
extent, and sometimes with great difficulty, we can choose the
country where we prefer to live, but we cannot choose the period
of the century and must try to find what we want in the period in
which we are placed by fate.
So we must understand that even the beginning of preparation
for development needs a combination of external and internal
conditions which only rarely come all together.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

But at the same time, we must understand that at least so far as
internal conditions are concerned, man is not entirely left to the
law of accident. There are many lights arranged for him by which
he can find his way if he cares to and if he is lucky. His possibility
is so small that the element of luck cannot be excluded.
Let us now try to answer the question: What makes a man
desire to acquire new knowledge and to change himself?
Man lives in life under two kinds of influences. This must be
very well understood and the difference between the two kinds of
influences must be very clear.
The first kind consists of interests and attractions created by life
itself: interests of one's health, safety, wealth, pleasures,
amusements, security, vanity, pride, fame, etc.
The second kind consists of interests of a different order
aroused by ideas which are not created in life but come originally
from schools. These influences do not reach man directly. They are
thrown into the general turnover of life, pass through many
different minds and reach a man through philosophy, science,
religion and art, always mixed with influences of the first kind and
generally very little resembling what they were in their beginning.
In most cases men do not realise the different origin of the
influences of the second kind and often explain them as having the
same origin as the first kind.
Although man does not know of the existence of two kinds of
influences, they both act on him and in one way or another way he
responds to them.
He can be more identified with one or with some of the
influences of the first kind and not feel influences of

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

the second kind at all. Or he can be attracted and affected by one
or another of the influences of the second kind. The result is
different in each case.
We will call the first kind of influence, influence A and the
second, influence B.
If a man is fully in the power of influence A, or of one
particular influence A, and quite indifferent to influence B,
nothing happens to him and his possibility of development
diminishes with every year of his life, and at a certain age,
sometimes quite an early age, it disappears completely. This
means that man dies while physically remaining still alive, like
grain that cannot germinate and produce a plant.
But if, on the other hand, man is not completely in the power
of influence A and if influences B attract him and make him feel
and think, results of the impressions they produce collect in him
together, attract other influences of the same kind and grow,
occupying a more important place in his mind and life.
If the results produced by influence B become sufficiently
strong, they fuse together and form in man what is called a
magnetic centre. It must be understood at once that the word
'centre' in this case does not mean the same thing as the
'intellectual' or the 'moving' centre; that is, centres in the essence.
Magnetic centre is in personality, it is simply a group of interests
which, when they become sufficiently strong, serve, to a certain
degree, as a guiding and controlling factor. Magnetic centre turns
one's interests in a certain direction and helps to keep them there.
At the same time it cannot do much by itself. A school is
necessary. Magnetic centre cannot replace a school, but it can help
to realise the need of a school; it can help to begin to look for a
school, or if one meets a school by

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

chance, magnetic centre can help to recognise a school and try not to lose
it. Because nothing is easier to lose than a school.
Possession of a magnetic centre is the first, although quite unspoken,
demand of a school. If a man without a magnetic centre, or a small or a
weak magnetic centre, or with several contradictory magnetic centres;
that is, interested in many incompatible things at the same time, meets a
school, he does not become interested in it, or he becomes critical at
once before he can know anything, or his interest disappears very quickly
when he meets with the first difficulties of school work. This is the chief
safeguard of a school. Without it the school would be filled with quite a
wrong kind of people who would immediately distort the school
teaching. A right magnetic centre not only helps one to recognise a
school, it also helps to absorb the school teaching which is different from
both influences A and influences B and may be called influence C.
Influence C can be transferred only by word of mouth, by direct
instruction, explanation and demonstration.
When a man meets with influence C and is able to absorb it, it is said
about him that in one point of himself;
that is, in magnetic centre, he becomes free from the law of accident.
From this moment the magnetic centre has actually played its part. It
brought man to a school or helped him in his first steps there. From then
on the ideas and the teaching of the school take the place of magnetic
centre and slowly begin to penetrate into the different parts of
personality and with time into essence.
One can learn many things about schools, about their organisation and
about their activity in the ordinary way by reading and by studying
historical periods when

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

schools were more conspicuous and more accessible. But there are
certain things about schools that one can learn only in schools
themselves. And the explanation of school principles and rules
occupies a very considerable place in school teaching.
One of the most important principles one learns in this way is
that real school work must proceed by three lines simultaneously.
One line of work, or two lines of work, cannot be called real
'school work.'
What are these three lines?
In the first lecture I said that these lectures are not a school.
Now I will be able to explain why they are not a school.
Once at a lecture a question was asked: Do people who study
this system work only for themselves or do they work for other
people? Now I will also answer this question.
The first line is study of oneself and study of the system, or the
'language.' Working on this line one certainly works for oneself.
The second line is work with other people in the school and
working with them, one works not only with them but for them.
So in the second line one learns to work with people and for
people.
This is why the second line is particularly difficult for some
people.
In the third line, one works for the school. In order to work for
the school, one must first understand the work of the school,
understand its aims and needs. And this requires time unless one is
really well prepared, because some people can begin with the third
line, or in any case find it very easily.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

When I said that these lectures are not a school, I meant that
these lectures give the possibility of only one line of work; that is,
study of the system and self-study. It is true that even by learning
together people study the beginning of the second line of work, at
least they learn to bear one another, and if their thought is broad
enough and their perception quick enough they can even grasp
something about the second and third lines of work. Still one
cannot expect much just from lectures.
In the second line of work, in complete school organisation,
people must not only talk together, but work together, and this
work can be very different but must always, in one or another
way, be useful to the school. So it means that working in the first
line people study the second line and working in the second line
they study the third line. Later you will learn why three lines are
necessary and why only three lines of work can proceed
successfully and towards a definite aim.
Even now you can understand the chief reason of the necessity
of three lines of work if you realise that man is asleep and
whatever work he starts, he soon loses interest in it and continues
mechanically. Three lines of work are necessary, first of all,
because one line awakes a man who falls asleep over another line.
If one really works on three lines, one can never fall asleep
completely; in any case one cannot sleep as happily as before; one
will always awake and realise that one's work has stopped.
I can show also one very characteristic difference between
three lines of work.
In the first line, one works chiefly on the study of the system or
self-study and on self-observation, and one must manifest in one's
work a certain amount of initiative in relation to oneself.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

In the second line one works in connection with certain
organised work and one must only do what one is told. No
initiative is required or admitted in the second line and the chief
point in this is discipline and following exactly what one is told,
without bringing in any of one's own ideas even if they appear
better than those that have been given.
In the third line again one can manifest more initiative, but one
must always verify oneself and not let oneself make decisions
against rules and principles, or against what one has been told.
I said before that the work begins with the study of the
language. It will be very useful if at this point you try to realise
that you already know a certain number of words of this new
language, and it will also be very useful if you try to count these
new words and write them down together. Only they must be
written down without any comments; that is, without
interpretation— comments and interpretations or explanations
must be in your understanding. You cannot put them on paper. If
this were possible, the study of psychological teachings would be
very simple. It would be sufficient to publish a sort of dictionary
or glossary and people would know all that it is necessary to know.
But, fortunately or unfortunately, this is impossible and men have
to learn and work each for himself.
We must again return to centres and find why we cannot
develop more quickly without the necessity for long school work.
We know that when we learn something, we accumulate new
material in our memory. But what is our memory? In order to
understand this, we must learn to

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

regard each centre as a separate and independent machine,
consisting of a sensitive matter similar to the mass of phonographic
rolls. All that happens to us, all that we see, all that we hear, all
that we feel, all that we learn is registered on these rolls. It means
that all external and internal events leave certain 'impressions' on
the rolls. 'Impressions' is a very good word because it actually is an
impression or an imprint. An impression can be deep, or it can be
very slight, or it can be simply a glancing impression that
disappears very quickly and leaves no trace after it. But whether
deep or slight they are impressions. And these impressions on rolls
are all that we have, all our possessions. Everything that we know,
everything that we have learned, everything that we have experienced is all there on our rolls. Exactly in the same way all our
thought processes, calculations, speculations consist only of
comparing the inscriptions on rolls, reading them again and again,
trying to understand them by putting them together, and so on.
We can think of nothing new, nothing that is not on our rolls. We
can neither say nor do anything that does not correspond to some
inscription on the rolls. We cannot invent a new thought in the
same way as we cannot invent a new animal, because all our ideas
of animals are created by our observation of existing animals.
Inscriptions or impressions on rolls are connected by
associations. Associations connect impressions either received
simultaneously or in some way similar to one another.
In my first lecture I said that memory depends on consciousness
and that we actually remember only the moments when we had
flashes of consciousness. It is quite clear that different
simultaneous impressions connected

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

together will remain longer in memory than unconnected
impressions. In the flash of self-consciousness, or even near it, all
impressions of the moment are connected and remain connected
in the memory. The same refers to impressions connected by their
inner similarity. If one is more conscious in the moment of
receiving impressions, one connects more definitely the new
impressions with similar old impressions and they remain connected in memory. On the other hand if one receives impressions
in a state of identification, one simply does not notice them and
their traces disappear before they can be appreciated or associated.
In the state of identification one does not see and one does not
hear. One is wholly in one's grievance, or in one's desire, or in
one's imagination. One cannot separate oneself from things or
feelings or memories and one is shut off from all the world
around.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

FOURTH LECTURE

WE SHALL begin today with a more detailed examination of
centres. This is the diagram of four centres.

Intellectual
centre
Emotional
centre
Moving and
Instinctive
centres

Head
Middle part of
the body. Chest
Lower part of
the body and
back

The diagram represents a man standing sideways, looking to the
left, and indicates the relative position of centres in a very
schematic way.
In reality each centre occupies the whole body, penetrates, so to
speak, the whole organism. At the same time, each centre has what
is called its 'centre of gravity.' The centre of gravity of the
intellectual centre is in the brain;
the centre of gravity of the emotional centre is in the solar plexus;
the centres of gravity of the moving and instinctive centres are in
the spinal cord.
It must be understood that in the present state of scientific
knowledge we have no means of verifying this statement, chiefly
because each centre includes in itself many properties which are
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
still unknown to ordinary
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

science and even to anatomy. It may sound strange, but the fact is
that the anatomy of the human body is far from being a
completed science.
So the study of centres, which are hidden from us, must begin
with the observation of their functions, which are quite open for
our investigation.
This is quite a usual course. In the different sciences— physics,
chemistry, astronomy, physiology—when we cannot reach the
facts or objects or matters we wish to study, we have to begin
with an investigation of their results or traces. In this case we shall
be dealing with the direct functions of centres; so all that we
establish about functions can be applied to centres.
All centres have much in common and, at the same time, each
centre has its own peculiar characteristics which must always be
kept in mind.
One of the most important principles that must be understood
in relation to centres is the great difference in their speed, that is,
a difference in the speeds of their functions.
The slowest is the intellectual centre. Next to it—although very
much faster—stand the moving and instinctive centres, which
have more or less the same speed. The fastest of all is the
emotional centre, though in the state of 'waking sleep' it works
only very rarely with anything approximating to its real speed,
and generally works with the speed of the instinctive and moving
centres.
Observations can help us to establish a great difference in the
speeds of functions, but they cannot give us the exact figures. In
reality the difference is very great, greater than one can imagine as
being possible between functions of the same organism. As I have
just said, with our ordinary means we cannot calculate the dif-

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

ference in the speed of centres, but, if we are told what it is, we
can find many facts which will confirm not the figures but the
existence of the enormous difference.
So before bringing in figures, I want to speak about ordinary
observations which can be made without any special knowledge.
Try, for instance, to compare the speed of mental processes
with moving functions. Try to observe yourself when you have to
perform many quick simultaneous movements, as when driving a
car in a very crowded street, or riding fast on a bad road, or doing
any work requiring quick judgment and quick movements. You
will see at once that you cannot observe all your movements. You
will either have to slow them down or miss the greater part of
your observations; otherwise you will risk an accident and
probably have one if you persist in observing. There are many
similar observations which can be made, particularly on the
emotional centre which is still faster. Everyone of us really has
many observations on the different speeds of our functions, but
only very rarely do we know the value of our observations and
experiences. Only when we know the principle do we begin to
understand our own previous observations.
At the same time it must be said that all the figures referring to
these different speeds are established and known in school
systems. As you will see later, the difference in the speed of
centres is a very strange figure which has a cosmic meaning, that
is, it enters into many cosmic processes or, it is better to say it
divides many cosmic processes one from another. This figure is 30,
000. This means that the moving and instinctive centres are 30,
000 times faster than the intellectual centre. And the

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

emotional centre, when it works with its proper speed, is 30, 000
times faster than the moving and instinctive centres.
It is difficult to believe in such an enormous difference in the
speeds of functions in the same organism. It actually means that
different centres have a quite different time. The instinctive and
moving centres have 30, 000 times longer time than the
intellectual centre, and the emotional centre has 30, 000 times
longer time than the moving and instinctive centres.
Do you understand clearly what 'longer time1 means? It means
that, for every kind of work that a centre has to do, it has so much
more time. However strange it may be, this fact of the great
difference in the speed of centres explains many well-known
phenomena which ordinary science cannot explain and which it
generally passes over in silence, or simply refuses to discuss. I am
referring now to the astonishing and quite inexplicable speed of
some of the physiological and mental processes.
For instance—a man drinks a glass of brandy, and immediately
in no more than a second, he experiences many new feelings and
sensations—a feeling of warmth, relaxation, relief, peace,
contentment, well-being, or on the other hand, anger, irritation,
and so on. What he feels may be different in different cases, but
the fact remains that the body responds to the stimulant very
quickly, almost at once.
There is really no need to speak about brandy or any other
stimulant; if a man is very thirsty or very hungry, a glass of water
or a piece of bread will produce the same quick effect.
Similar phenomena representing the enormous speed of certain
processes can be noticed, for instance, in

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

observing dreams. I referred to some of these observations in A
New Model of the Universe.
The difference is again either between the instinctive and the
intellectual centres or between the moving and the intellectual.
But we are so accustomed to these phenomena that we rarely
think how strange and incomprehensible they are.
Of course, for a man who has never thought about himself and
never tried to study himself, there is nothing strange in this or in
anything else. But in reality, from the point of view of ordinary
physiology, these phenomena look almost miraculous.
A physiologist knows how many complicated processes must
be gone through between swallowing brandy or a glass of water
and feeling its effects. Every substance entering the body by way
of the mouth has to be analysed, tried in several different ways
and only then accepted or rejected. And all this happens in one
second or less. It is a miracle, and at the same time it is not. For, if
we know the difference in the speed of centres and remember
that the instinctive centre, which has to do this work, has 30, 000
times more time than the intellectual centre by which we
measure our ordinary time, we can understand how it may
happen. It means that the instinctive centre has not one second,
but about eight hours of its own time for this work, and in eight
hours this work can certainly be done in an ordinary laboratory
without any unnecessary haste. So our idea of the extraordinary
speed of this work is purely an illusion which we have because we
think that our ordinary time, or the time of the intellectual centre,
is the only time which exists.
We shall return later on to the study of the difference in speed
of centres.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

Now we must try to understand another characteristic of
centres which will later give us very good material for selfobservation and for work upon ourselves.
It is supposed that each centre is divided into two parts,
positive and negative.
This division is particularly clear in the intellectual centre and
in the instinctive centre.
All the work of the intellectual centre is divided into two parts:
affirmation and negation; yes and no. In every moment of our
thinking, either one outweighs the other or they come to a
moment of equal strength in indecision. The negative part of the
intellectual centre is as useful as the positive part, and any
diminishing of the strength of the one in relation to the other
results in mental disorders.
In the work of the instinctive centre the division is also quite
clear, and both parts, positive and negative, or pleasant and
unpleasant, are equally necessary for a right orientation in life.
Pleasant sensations of taste, smell, touch, temperature, warmth,
coolness, fresh air—all indicate conditions which are beneficial for
life; and unpleasant sensations of bad taste, bad smell, unpleasant
touch, feeling of oppressive heat or extreme cold, all indicate
conditions which can be harmful to life.
It may definitely be said that no true orientation in life is
possible without both pleasant and unpleasant sensations. They
are the real guidance of all animal life on the earth and any defect
in them results in a lack of orientation and a consequent danger of
illness and death. Think how quickly a man would poison himself
if he

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

lost all sense of taste and smell, or if, in some unnatural way, he
conquered in himself a natural disgust of unpleasant sensations.
In the moving centre the division into two parts, positive and
negative, has only a logical meaning; that is, movement as opposed
to rest. It has no meaning for practical observation.
In the emotional centre, at a first glance, the division is quite
simple and obvious. If we take pleasant emotions such as joy,
sympathy, affection, self-confidence, as belonging to the positive
part, and unpleasant emotions such as boredom, irritation,
jealousy, envy, fear, as belonging to the negative part, things will
look very simple; but in reality they are much more complicated.
To begin with, in the emotional centre there is no natural
negative part. The greater part of negative emotions are artificial;
they do not belong to the emotional centre proper and are based
on instinctive emotions which are quite unrelated to them but
which are transformed by imagination and identification. This is
the real meaning of the theory of James and Lange, at one time
very well-known. They insisted that all emotions were really
sensations of changes in inner organs and tissues, changes which
took place before sensations, and were the actual cause of
sensations. That really meant that external events and inner
realisations did not produce emotions. External events and inner
realisations produced inner reflexes which produced sensations;
and these were interpreted as emotions. At the same time positive
emotions such as 'love,' hope,' 'faith' in the sense in which they are
usually understood; that is, as permanent emotions, are impossible
for a man in the ordinary state of consciousness. They require
higher states

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

of consciousness; they require inner unity, self-consciousness,
permanent 'I' and will.
Positive emotions are emotions which cannot become negative. But
all our pleasant emotions such as joy, sympathy, affection, selfconfidence, can, at any moment, turn into boredom, irritation
envy, fear and so on. Love can turn into jealousy or fear to lose
what one loves, or into anger and hatred; hope can turn into daydreaming and the expectation of impossible things, and faith can
turn into superstition and a weak acceptance of comforting nonsense.
Even a purely intellectual emotion—the desire for knowledge,
or an aesthetic emotion; that is, a feeling of beauty or harmony—if
it becomes mixed with identification, immediately unites with
emotions of a negative kind such as self-pride, vanity, selfishness,
conceit and so on.
So we can say without any possibility of mistake that we can
have no positive emotions. At the same time, in actual fact, we
have no negative emotions which exist without imagination and
identification. Of course it cannot be denied that besides the many
and varied kinds of physical suffering which belong to the
instinctive centre, man has many kinds of mental suffering which
belong to the emotional centre. He has many sorrows, griefs, fears,
apprehensions and so on which cannot be avoided and are as
closely connected with man's life as illness, pain and death. But
these mental sufferings are very different from negative emotions
which are based on imagination and identification.
These emotions are a terrible phenomenon. They occupy an
enormous place in our life. Of many people it is possible to say
that all their lives are regulated and

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

controlled, and in the end ruined, by negative emotions, At the
same time negative emotions do not play any useful part at all in
our lives. They do not help our orientation, they do not give us
any knowledge, they do not guide us in any sensible manner. On
the contrary, they spoil all our pleasures, they make life a burden
to us and they very effectively prevent our possible development
because there is nothing more mechanical in our life than negative
emotions.
Negative emotions can never come under our control. People
who think they can control their negative emotions and manifest
them when they want to, simply deceive themselves. Negative
emotions depend on identification; if identification is destroyed in
some particular case, they disappear. The strangest and most
fantastic fact about negative emotions is that people actually worship them. I think that, for an ordinary mechanical man, the most
difficult thing to realise is that his own and other people's negative
emotions, have no value whatever and do not contain anything
noble, anything beautiful or anything strong. In reality negative
emotions contain nothing but weakness and very often the
beginning of hysteria, insanity or crime. The only good thing about
them is that, being quite useless and artificially created by
imagination and identification, they can be destroyed without any
loss. And this is the only chance of escape that man has.
If negative emotions were useful or necessary for any, even the
smallest purpose, and if they were a function of a really existing
part of the emotional centre, man would have no chance because
no inner development is possible so long as man keeps his
negative emotions.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

In school language it is said on the subject of the struggle with
negative emotions:
Man must sacrifice his suffering.

'What could be easier to sacrifice?' everyone will say. But in
reality people would sacrifice anything rather than their negative
emotions. There is no pleasure and no enjoyment man would not
sacrifice for quite small reasons, but he will never sacrifice his
suffering. And in a sense there is a reason for this.
In a quite superstitious way man expects to gain something by
sacrificing his pleasures, but he cannot expect anything for
sacrifice of his suffering. He is full of wrong ideas about
suffering—he still thinks that suffering is sent to him by God or
by gods for his punishment or for his edification, and he will even
be afraid to hear of the possibility of getting rid of his suffering in
such a simple way. The idea is made even more difficult by the
existence of many sufferings from which man really cannot get
rid, and of many other sufferings which are entirely based on
man's imagination, which he cannot and will not give up, like the
idea of injustice, for instance, and the belief in the possibility of
destroying injustice.
Besides that many people have nothing but negative emotions.
All their I's are negative. If you were to take negative emotions
away from them, they would simply collapse and go up in smoke.
And what would happen to all our life, without negative
emotions? What would happen to what we call art, to the
theatre, to drama, to most novels?
Unfortunately there is no chance of negative emotions
disappearing. Negative emotions can be conquered and can
disappear only with the help of school knowledge

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

and school methods. The struggle against negative emotions is a
part of school training and is closely connected with all school
work.
What is the origin of negative emotions if they are artificial,
unnatural and useless? As we do not know the origin of man we
cannot discuss this question, and we can speak about negative
emotions and their origin only in relation to ourselves and our
lives. For instance, in watching children we can see how they are
taught negative emotions and how they learn them themselves
through imitation of grown-ups and older children.
If, from the earliest days of his life, a child could be put among
people who have no negative emotions, he would probably have
none, or so very few that they could be easily conquered by right
education. But in actual life things happen quite differently, and
with the help of all the examples he can see and hear, with the
help of reading, the cinema and so on, a child of about ten already
knows the whole scale of negative emotions and can imagine
them, reproduce them, and identify with them as well as any
grown-up man.
In grown-up people negative emotions are supported by the
constant justification and glorification of them in literature and
art, and by personal self-justification and self-indulgence. Even
when we become tired of them we do not believe that we can
become quite free from them.
In reality, we have much more power over negative emotions
than we think, particularly when we already know how dangerous
they are and how urgent is the struggle with them. But we find
too many excuses for them, and swim in the seas of self-pity and
selfishness, as the case may be, finding fault in everything except
ourselves.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

All that has just been said shows that we are in a very strange
position in relation to our emotional centre. It has no positive
part, and no negative part. Most of its negative functions are
invented and there are many people who have never in their lives
experienced any real emotion, so completely is their time
occupied with imaginary emotions.
So we cannot say that our emotional centre is divided into two
parts, positive and negative. We can only say that we have
pleasant emotions and unpleasant emotions, and that all of them
which are not negative at a given moment can turn into negative
emotions under the slightest provocations or even without any
provocation.
This is the true picture of our emotional life and if we look
sincerely at ourselves we must realise that so long as we cultivate
and admire in ourselves all these poisonous emotions we cannot
expect to be able to develop unity, consciousness or will. If such
development were possible, then all these negative emotions
would enter into our new being and become permanent in us.
This would mean that it would be impossible for us ever to get
rid of them. Luckily for us, such a thing cannot happen.
In our present state the only good thing about us is that there is
nothing permanent in us. If anything becomes permanent in our
present state, it means insanity. Only lunatics can have a
permanent ego.
Incidentally this fact disposes of another false term that crept
into the psychological language of the day from the so-called
psycho-analysis: I mean the word 'complex.'
There is nothing in our psychological make-up that corresponds
to the idea of 'complex.' In the psychiatry of the nineteenth
century, what is now called 'complex' was called a 'fixed idea,' and
'fixed ideas' were taken as
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

signs of insanity. And that remains perfectly correct.
Normal man cannot have 'fixed ideas' 'complexes' or 'fixations'.
It is useful to remember this in case someone tries to find
complexes in you. We have many bad features as it is and our
chances are very small even without complexes.
Returning now to the question of work on ourselves we must
ask ourselves what our chances actually are. We must discover in
ourselves functions and manifestations which we can, to a certain
extent, control, and we must exercise control, trying to increase it
as much as possible. For instance, we have a certain control over
our movements, and in many schools, particularly in the East,
work on oneself begins with acquiring as full a control over movements as possible. But this needs special training, very much time
and the study of very elaborate exercises. Under the conditions of
modern life we have more control over our thoughts, and in
connection with this there is a special method by which we may
work on the development of our consciousness using that
instrument which is most obedient to our will; that is, our mind,
or the intellectual centre.
In order to understand more clearly what I am going to say, you
must try to remember that we have no control over our
consciousness. When I said that we can become more conscious,
or that a man can be made conscious for a moment simply by
asking him if he is conscious or not, I used the words 'conscious'
or 'consciousness' in a relative sense. There are so many degrees of
consciousness and every higher degree means 'consciousness' in
relation to a lower degree. But, if we have no control over
consciousness itself, we have a certain

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

control over our thinking about consciousness, and we can
construct our thinking in such a way as to bring consciousness.
What I mean is that by giving to our thoughts the direction which
they would have in a moment of consciousness, we can, in this
way, induce consciousness.
Now try to formulate what you noticed when you tried to
observe yourself.
You noticed three things. First, that you do not remember
yourself; that is, that you are not aware of yourself at the time
when you try to observe yourself. Second, that observation is
made difficult by the incessant stream of thoughts, images, echoes
of conversation, fragments of emotions, flowing through your
mind and very often distracting your attention from observation.
And third, that the moment you start self-observation something
in you starts imagination, and self-observation, if you really try it,
is a constant struggle with imagination.
Now this is the chief point in work upon oneself. If one
realises that all the difficulties in the work depend on the fact that
one cannot remember oneself, one already knows what one must
do.
One must try to remember oneself.

In order to do this one must struggle with mechanical thoughts
and one must struggle with imagination.
If one does this conscientiously and persistently one will see
results in a comparatively short time. But one must not think that
it is easy or that one can master this practice immediately.
Self-remembering, as it is called, is a very difficult thing to learn
to practice. It must not be based on an expectation of results,
otherwise one can identify with one's efforts. It must be based on
the realisation of the fact
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

that we do not remember ourselves, and that at the same time we
can remember ourselves, if we try sufficiently hard and in the
right way.
We cannot become conscious at will, at the moment when we
want to, because we have no command over states of
consciousness. But we can remember ourselves for a short time, at
will because we have a certain command over our thoughts. And
if we start remembering ourselves, by the special construction of
our thoughts; that is, by the realisation that we do not remember
ourselves, that nobody remembers himself, and by realising all that
this means, this will bring us to consciousness.
You must remember that we have found the weak spot in the
walls of our mechanicalness. This is the knowledge that we do not
remember ourselves; and the realisation that we can try to
remember ourselves. Up to this moment our task has only been
self-study. Now, with the understanding of the necessity for actual
change in ourselves, work begins.
Later on you will learn that the practice of self-remembering,
connected with self-observation and with the struggle against
imagination, has not only a psychological meaning, but it also
changes the subtlest part of our metabolism and produces definite
chemical, or perhaps it is better to say alchemical, effects in our
body. So today from psychology we have come to alchemy;
that is, to the idea of the transformation of coarse elements into
finer ones.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

FIFTH LECTURE

IN RELATION to the study of man's possible development I must

establish one very important point.
There are two sides of man that must be developed, that is,
there are two lines of possible development that must
proceed simultaneously.
These two sides of man, or two lines of possible
development, are knowledge and being.
I have already spoken many times about the necessity for
the development of knowledge, and particularly selfknowledge, because one of the most characteristic features
of man's present state is that he does not know himself.
Generally people understand the idea of different levels of
knowledge, the idea of the relativity of knowledge and the
necessity for quite new knowledge.
What people do not understand in most cases is the idea of
being as quite separate from knowledge; and further, the
idea of the relativity of being, the possibility of different
levels of being and the necessity for the development of
being, separately from the development of knowledge.
A Russian philosopher, Vladimir Solovieff, used the term
'being' in his writings. He spoke about the being of a stone,
the being of a plant, the being of an animal, the being of a
man and the divine being.
This is better than the ordinary concept because in ordinary
understanding the being of a man is not

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

regarded as in any way different from the being of a stone, the
being of a plant or the being of an animal. From the ordinary
point of view a stone, a plant, an animal are or exist exactly as a
man is or exists. In reality, they exist quite differently. But
Solovieff's division is not sufficient. There is no such thing as the
being of a man. Men are too different for that. I have already
explained that from point of view of the system we are studying,
the concept of man is divided into seven concepts: man No. 1,
man No. 2, man No. 3, man No. 4, man No. 5, man No. 6, and
man No. 7. This means seven degrees or categories of being: being
No. 1, being No. 2, being No. 3 and so on. In addition to this we
already know finer divisions. We know that there may be very
different men No. 1, very different men No. 2, and very different
men No. 3. They may live entirely under influences A. They may
be equally affected by influences A and B. They may be more
under influences B than A. They may have a magnetic centre.
They may have come into contact with school influence or
influence C. They may be on the way to becoming men No. 4. All
these categories indicate different levels of being.
The idea of being, entered into the very foundation of thinking
and speaking about man in religious thought, and all other
divisions of man were regarded as unimportant in comparison
with this. Men were divided into pagans, unbelievers or heretics
on the one hand, and into true believers, righteous men, saints,
prophets and so on. All these definitions referred not to
differences in views and convictions, that is, not to knowledge, but
to being.
In modem thought people ignore the idea of being and
different levels of being. On the contrary, they

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

believe that the more discrepancies and contradictions there are in
a man's being, the more interesting and brilliant he can be. It is
generally, although tacitly, and not always even tacitly, admitted
that a man can be given to lying, he can be selfish, unreliable,
unreasonable, perverted, and yet be a great scientist or a great
philosopher or a great artist. Of course this is quite impossible.
This incompatibility of different features of one's being, which is
generally regarded as originality, actually means weakness. One
cannot be a great thinker or a great artist with a perverted or an
inconsistent mind, just as one cannot be a prizefighter or a circus
athlete with consumption. The widespread acceptance of the idea
that inconsistency and amorality means originality is responsible
for the many scientific, artistic and religious fakes of our present
time and probably of all times.
It is necessary to understand clearly what being means, and why
it must grow and develop side by side with knowledge, but
independently of it.
If knowledge outgrows being or being outgrows knowledge,
the result is always a one-sided development, and a one-sided
development cannot go far. It is bound to come to some inner
contradiction of a serious nature and stop there.
Some time later we may speak about the different kinds and
the different results of one-sided development. Ordinarily, in life
we meet with only one kind, that is, when knowledge has
outgrown being. The result takes the form of a dogmatization of
certain ideas and the consequent impossibility of a further
development of knowledge because of the loss of understanding.
Now I shall speak about understanding.
What is understanding?

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

Try to ask yourself this question and you will see that you
cannot answer it. You have always confused understanding with
knowing or having information. But to know and to understand
are two quite different things and you must learn to distinguish
between them.
In order to understand a thing, you must see its connection
with some bigger subject, or bigger whole, and the possible
consequences of this connection. Understanding is always the
understanding of a smaller problem in relation to a bigger
problem.
For instance, suppose I show you an old Russian silver rouble.
It was a piece of money the size of a halfcrown and corresponding
to two shillings and a penny. You may look at it, study it, notice
in which year it was coined, find out everything about the Tsar
whose portrait is on one side, weigh it, even make a chemical
analysis and determine the exact quantity of silver contained in it.
You can learn what the word 'rouble' means and how it came into
use. You can learn all these things and probably many more, but
you will not understand it and its meaning if you do not find out
that before the last war its purchasing power corresponded in
many cases to a present-day English pound, and that the presentday paper rouble in Bolshevik Russia corresponds in many cases to
an English farthing or even less. If you find out this you will
understand something about a rouble and perhaps also about
some other things, because the understanding of one thing
immediately leads to the understanding of many other things.
Often people even think understanding means finding a name,
a word, a title or a label for a new or unexpected phenomenon.
This finding or inventing of words for incomprehensible things
has nothing to do with under-

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

standing. On the contrary, if we could get rid of half of our words
perhaps we should have a better chance of a certain
understanding.
If we ask ourselves what it means to understand or not to
understand a man, we must first think of an instance of not being
able to speak with a man in his own language. Naturally two
people having no common language will not understand one
another. They must have a common language or agree on certain
signs or symbols by which they will designate things. But suppose
that during a conversation with a man you disagree about the
meaning of certain words or signs or symbols, then you again cease
to understand one another.
From this follows the principle that you cannot under-stand and
disagree. In ordinary conversation we very often say: I understand
him but I do not agree with him. From the point of view of the
system we are studying, this is impossible. If you understand a
man, you agree with him; if you disagree with him, you do not
understand him.
It is difficult to accept this idea and this means that it is difficult
to understand it.
As I have just said, there are two sides of man which must
develop in the normal course of his evolution:
knowledge and being. But neither knowledge nor being can stay
still or remain in the same state. If either of them does not grow
bigger and stronger, it becomes smaller and weaker.
Understanding may be compared to an arithmetical mean
between knowledge and being. It shows the necessity for a
simultaneous growth of knowledge and being. The growth of only
one and diminishing of another will not change the arithmetical
mean.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

This also explains why 'to understand' means to agree. People
who understand one another must not only have an equal
knowledge, they must also have an equal being. Only then is
mutual understanding possible.
Another wrong idea which people have or which belongs
particularly to our times, is that understanding can be different,
that people can, that is, have the right, to understand the same
thing differently.
This is quite wrong from the point of view of the system.
Understanding cannot be different. There can only be one
understanding, the rest is non-understanding, or incomplete
understanding.
But at the same time people often think that they understand
things differently. We can see examples of this every day. How
can we find an explanation of this seeming contradiction?
In reality, there is no contradiction. Understanding means
understanding of a part in relation to the whole. But the idea of
the whole can be very different in people according to their
knowledge and being. This is why the system is again necessary.
People learn to understand by understanding the system and
everything else in relation to the system.
But speaking on an ordinary level without the idea of a school
or a system, one must admit that there are as many
understandings as there are many people. Everyone understands
everything in his own way or according to one or another
mechanical training or habit; but this is all a subjective and
relative understanding. The way to objective understanding lies
through school systems and the change of being.
In order to explain this I must return to the division of man
into seven categories.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

You must realise that there is a great difference between men
No. 1, 2 and 3 on one hand and men of higher categories on
another hand. In reality the difference is much greater than we can
imagine. It is so great that all life from this point of view is
regarded as being divided into two concentric circles—the inner
circle and the outer circle of humanity.
To the inner circle belong men No. 5, 6 and 7; to the outer
circle, men No. 1, 2 and 3. Men No. 4 are on the threshold of the
inner circle or between the two circles.

The inner circle is in its turn divided into three concentric
circles; the innermost, to which belong men No. 7, the middle to
which belong men No. 6, and the outer-inner circle to which
belong men No. 5.

This division does not concern us at the moment. For us, the
three inner circles form one inner circle.
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

The outer circle in which we live has several names
designating its different features. It is called the mechanical
circle, because everything happens there, everything is
mechanical and the people who live there are machines. It is also
called the circle of the confusion of tongues, because people who
live in this circle all speak in different languages and never
understand one another. Everyone understands everything
differently.
We have come to a very interesting definition of
understanding. It is something that belongs to the inner circle of
humanity and does not belong to us at all.
If men in the outer circle realise that they do not understand
one another, and if they feel the need of understanding, they
must try to penetrate into the inner circle, because
understanding between people possible only there.
Schools of different kinds serve as gates through which
people can pass into the inner circles. But this penetration into
the circle higher in comparison wit the one in which a man is
born requires long an difficult work. The very first step in this
work is this
study of a new language. You may ask: What is this language we
are studying?
And now I am able to answer you.
It is the language of the inner circle, the language in which
people can understand one another.
You must realise that standing, so to speak, outside the inner
circle we can know only the rudiments this language. But even
these rudiments will help us to understand one another better
than we could ever understand without them.
The three inner circles have each a language of their own. We
are studying the language of the outer of the
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

inner circles. People in the outer-inner circle study the language of
the middle circle, and people in the middle circle study the
language of the innermost circle. If you ask me how all this can be
proved I will answer
that it can be proved only by further study of oneself and further
observation. If we find that with the study of the system we can
understand ourselves and other people, or for instance, certain
books, or certain ideas better than we could understand them
before, and particularly if we find definite facts which show that
this new understanding develops, that will be, if not proof, at least
a sign of the possibility of proof.
We must remember that our understanding, exactly as our
consciousness, is not always on the same level. It is always moving
up and down. That means that at me movement we understand
more, and at another moment we understand less. If we notice
these differences of understanding in ourselves, we shall be able
to realise that there is a possibility first, of keeping to hose higher
levels of understanding and second, of surpassing them.
But theoretical study is not sufficient. You must work
on your being and on the change of your being.
If you formulate your aim from the point of view that you wish
to understand other people, you must remember one very
important school principle: you can understand other people only
as much as you understand
yourself and only on the level of your own being.
This means that you can judge other people's know-edge, but
you cannot judge their being. You can see in them only as much
as you have in yourself. But people
aIways make the mistake of thinking that they can judge other
people's being. In reality, if they wish to meet
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

and understand people of higher development than themselves they must work with the aim of changing their being.
Now we must return to the study of centres and to the
study of attention and self-remembering, because these are
the only ways to understanding.
Besides the division into two parts, positive and negative
which, as we saw, is not the same in different centres, each of
the four centres is divided into three parts. These three parts
correspond to the definition of centres themselves. The first
part is 'mechanical' including moving and instinctive
principles, or one of them predominating; the second is
'emotional' and the third is 'intellectual.' The following
diagram shows the position of parts in the intellectual centre.
The centre is divided into positive and negative parts, each of
these two parts is divided into three parts. Thus the
Intellectual centre actually consists of six parts.

Each of these six parts is in its turn sub-divided into three
parts: mechanical, emotional and intellectual. But about this
sub-division we shall speak much later with the exception of
one part, that is, the mechanical part of the intellectual
centre, about which we shall speak presently.
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

The division of a centre into three parts is very simple. A
mechanical part works almost automatically; it does not require
any attention. But because of this it cannot adapt itself to a change
of circumstances, it cannot 'think' and it continues to work in the
way it started when circumstances have completely changed.
In the intellectual centre, the mechanical part includes in itself
all the work of registration of impressions, memories and
associations. This is all that it should do normally, that is, when
other parts do their work. It should never reply to questions
addressed to the whole centre, it should never try to solve its
problems, and it should never decide anything. Unfortunately, in
actual fact, it is always ready to decide and it always replies to
questions of all sorts in a very narrow and limited way, in readymade phrases, in slang expressions, in party slogans. All these, and
many other elements of our usual reactions, are the work of the
mechanical part of the intellectual centre.
This part has its own name. It is called a 'formatory apparatus'
or sometimes 'formatory centre.' Many people, particularly people
No. 1, that is, the great majority of mankind, live all their lives
with the formatory apparatus only, never touching other parts of
their intellectual centre. For all the immediate needs of life, for
receiving A influences and responding to them, and for distorting
or rejecting influences C, the formatory apparatus is quite
sufficient.
It is always possible to recognise 'formatory thinking.' For
instance, formatory centre can count only up to two. It always
divides everything in two: 'bolshevism and fascism,' 'workers and
bourgeois,' proletarians and capitalists' and so on. We owe most
modern catchwords

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

to formatory thinking, and not only catchwords but in modern
popular theories. Perhaps it is possible to say
that at all times all popular theories are formatory.
The emotional part of the intellectual centre consists
chiefly of what is called an intellectual emotion, that desire to
know, desire to understand, satisfaction knowing, dissatisfaction
of not knowing, pleasure discovery and so on, although again all
these can manifest themselves on very different levels.
The work of the emotional part requires full attention but in
this part of the centre attention does not require any effort. It is
attracted and held by the subject itself, very often through
identification, which usually is called 'interest,' or 'enthusiasm,'
or' passion,' or 'devotion'
The intellectual part of the intellectual centre includes in
itself a capacity for creation, construction, invention and
discovery. It cannot work without attention, but the attention in
this part of the centre must be controlled and kept there by will
and effort.
This is the chief criterion in studying parts of centres If we
take them from the point of view of attention we shall know at
once in which part of centres we are. Without attention or
with attention wandering, we are in the mechanical part: with
the attention attracted by the subject of observation or
reflection and kept there, we are in the emotional part; with
the attention con-trolled and held on the subject by will, we
are in the intellectual part.
At the same time, the same method shows how to make the
intellectual parts of centres work. By observing attention and
trying to control it, we compel ourselves to work in the
intellectual parts of centres, because the same principle refers
to all centres equally, although
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

may not be so easy for us to distinguish intellectual arts in
other centres, as for instance the intellectual art of instinctive
centre, which works without any attention that we can perceive
or control.
Let us take the emotional centre. I will not speak at resent
about negative emotions. We will take only the [vision of the
centre into three parts: mechanical, emotional and intellectual.
The mechanical part consists of the cheapest kind of readymade humour and a rough sense of the comical, love of
excitement, love of spectacular shows, love of pageantry,
sentimentality, love of being in a crowd and part of a
crowd; attraction to crowd emotions of all kinds and complete
disappearance in lower half-animal emotions:
cruelty, selfishness, cowardice, envy, jealousy, and so on. The
emotional part may be very different in different people. It may
include in itself a sense of humour or a sense of the comical as
well as religious emotion, aesthetic emotion, moral emotion and,
in this case, it may lead to the awakening of conscience. But with
identification it may be something quite different, it may be
very ironical, sarcastic, derisive, cruel, obstinate, wicked and
jealous— only in a less primitive way than the mechanical part.
The intellectual part of the emotional centre (with the help of
the intellectual parts of the moving and instinctive centres)
includes in itself the power of artistic creation. In those cases
where the intellectual parts of the moving and instinctive
centres which are necessary for the manifestation of the creative
faculty are not sufficiently educated or do not correspond to it
in their development, it may manifest itself in dreams. This
explains the beautiful and artistic dreams of otherwise quite
unartistic people. The intellectual part of the emotional centre is
also
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

the chief seat of the magnetic centre. I mean that if magnetic
centre exists only in the intellectual centre or in the emotional
part of the emotional centre, it cannot be strong enough to be
effective and is always liable to make mistakes or fail. But the
intellectual part of the emotional centre, when it is fully
developed and works with its full power, is a way to higher
centres.
In the moving centre, the mechanical part is automatic. All
automatic movements which in ordinary language are called
'instinctive' belong to it, as well as imitation and the capacity for
imitation which plays such a big part in life.
The emotional part of the moving centre is connected chiefly
with the pleasure of movement. Love of sport and of games
should normally belong to this part of the moving centre, but
when identification and other emotions become mixed with it, it
is very rarely there, and in most cases the love of sport is in the
moving part of either the intellectual or the emotional centres.
The intellectual part of the moving centre is a very important
and a very interesting instrument. Everyone who has ever done
well any kind of physical work, whatever it may have been,
knows that every kind of work needs many inventions. One has to
invent one's own small methods for everything one does. These
inventions are the work of the intellectual part of the moving
centre, and many other inventions of man also need the work of
the intellectual part of the moving centre. The power of imitating
at will the voice, intonations and gestures of other people, such as
actors possess, also belongs to the intellectual part of moving
centre; but in higher 0r better degrees it is mixed with the work
of the intellectual part of the emotional centre.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

The work of the instinctive centre is very well hidden from us.
We really know, that is, feel and can observe, only the sensory and
emotional part.
The mechanical part includes in itself habitual sensations which
very often we do not notice at all, but which serve as a
background to other sensations; also instinctive movements in the
correct meaning of the expression, that is, all inner movements
such as the circulation of the blood, the movement of food in the
organism and inner and outer reflexes.
The intellectual part is very big and very important. In the state
of self-consciousness or approaching it, one can come into contact
with the intellectual part of the Instinctive centre and learn a
great deal from it concerning the functioning of the machine and
its possibilities. The intellectual part of the instinctive centre is
the mind behind all the work of the organism, a mind quite
different from the intellectual mind.
The study of parts of centres and their special functions
requires a certain degree of self-remembering. Without
remembering oneself one cannot observe for a sufficiently long
time or sufficiently clearly to feel and understand the difference of
functions belonging to different parts of different centres.
The study of attention shows the parts of centres better than
anything, but the study of attention again requires a certain degree
of self-remembering.
Very soon you will realise that all your work upon yourself is
connected with self-remembering and that it cannot proceed
successfully without this. And self-remembering is partial
awakening, or the beginning of awakening. Naturally—and this
must be very clear— no work can be done in sleep.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

LECTURE HELD ON THURSDAY, 23 SEPTEMBER
1937

THERE are some things I want to speak about, because without

understanding them you will not be able to understand many
other things.
First of all, we must talk about schools, then about the
principles and methods of the organisation and work of schools,
and particularly about rules, then about the history of our work.
Soon you will be able to read the beginning of a book I am
writing, called 'Fragments of an Unknown Teaching' where I
describe how I met this system and how the work developed.
It was explained to you many times and in different ways that
nobody can work alone without a school. Also it must be clear to
you by now that a group of people who decide to work by
themselves will arrive nowhere, because they do not know where
to go and what to do. The question arises. What is a school? And
the next question which is most important for us is: Is this i.e.,
our organisation, a school?
There are many kinds of schools. I have spoken before about
the four ways: way of fakir, way of monk way of yogi and the
fourth way. From the point of view of this division schools are
also divided in the four kinds: fakir schools, religious schools or
monasteries yogi schools and the schools of the fourth way.
Then—what constitutes a school? Speaking gen
* In Search of the Miraculous.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

erally, a school is a place where one can learn something, i.e.,
from the school. There can be schools of modern languages,
schools of music, schools of medicine , etc. But the kind of school
I mean is not only for learning but also for becoming different. A
school I speak about must not only give knowledge but also help
to change being: without that it would be just an ordinary school.
Knowledge is necessary, but know-ledge can come only from
those who passed the same way before. So the man who can
conduct work must come from a school; that means he must be
connected with a school, or at least he must have received
instruction from a school in the past. A self-appointed or elected
head of a group also cannot lead it anywhere.
Then schools are divided by degrees. There are schools where
men No. 1, 2, and 3 learn how to become No. 4 and acquire all
the knowledge that will help them in this change. The next
degree are schools where men No. 4 learn how to become No. 5.
There is n0 need for us to speak of further degrees, as they are
too far from us.
Now an interesting question arises: Can we call ourselves a
school? In a certain sense we may, because we acquire a certain
knowledge and at the same time learn how to change our being.
But I must say in relation to this that in the beginning of our
work, i.e., in 1916 in St. Petersburg, we understood that a school,
in the full sense of the term, must consist of two degrees, i.e., it
must have two levels in it, one level where men No 1, 2, and 3
learn to become No. 4, and the other where men No. 4 learn to
become No. 5. If a school has two levels it has more possibilities,
because a double organisation of this kind can give a larger

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

variety of experience and make the work more quick and more
sure. So, although in a certain sense we can call ourselves a school,
it is better to use this term for a bigger organisation.
What makes a school? First of all, it is understanding of
principles of school work and discipline of a certain very definite
kind connected with rules. When people come to lectures, they
are told about certain rules they must keep. These rules are
conditions on which they are accepted and given knowledge.
Keeping these rules or conditions is their first payment.
The first rule I was told about was that I must promise not to
write about anything I hear. Later you will hear what I answered
when I was told this and how this problem was solved. This rule
means that you cannot write, without the permission of the
person conducting the work from whom you have learned, what
you intend to write, and when you write, if you get his permission,
you must refer to the man from whom you learnt these ideas, and
to the source of these ideas.
When I publish the Fragments you will be able to write. So long
as Fragments is not published you cannot write. When this book is
published, this condition will be removed, but not until then.
Then there are other rules: you must not talk. This means you
must not make these ideas subject of ordinary talk, without aim or
purpose. And if you talk with a certain aim and a certain
purpose—I mean with people outside of the work—you must be
very careful and you must not say much. You must remember
that people must pay for what they hear. This is the principle of
the work, and you have no right to give ideas to

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

people for which they not only not pay but even cannot be
expected to pay. It is better to ask permission to speak in each
individual case.
Now I want to speak about one particular rule that was
introduced into these groups and which is very important. I must
explain how this rule arose, and before this, I must give you a
short description of the history of the work. I met this system in
1915 in Russia. There was a group in Moscow conducted by G. I.
Gurdjieff, a Caucasian Greek who came to Russia from Central
Asia. I learned very much working with these groups, but in 1918
I parted from them because from my point of view they began to
lose the most important of their original principles. Soon after my
parting with them almost all members of groups parted with Mr.
G. Only four people remained with him.
I met Mr. G. again in 1920 at Constantinople and again tried to
work with him, but very soon found that it was impossible. In the
beginning of 1922 when I was already in London Mr. G. came to
me and told me about his plans for new work which he intended
to start in England or in France. I did not believe much in these
plans, but I decided to make a last experiment and promised to
help him to organise his work. At that time I already had groups
in London. After some time G.'s work was started in France. I
collected money for him and many of my people went to the
place he bought at Fontainebleau on their money. I went there
myself several times and continued to do it till the end of 1923,
when I saw that things were going wrong at Fontainebleau and
decided to part with Mr. G. completely.
If you ask me what was wrong, I can say only one

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

thing, which really was quite sufficient to wreck every thing. By
this time Mr. G. had abandoned most of the principles he
himself taught us in Russia, particularly principles referring to
choice and preparation of people for the work. He began to
accept people without any preparation, gave them places of
authority, permitted them to speak about the work and so on. I
saw that his work was going to crash, and I parted with him in
order to save the work in London.
In January 1924 I told my groups in London that had broken
all connections with Mr. G. and his group and would continue
my work on my own as I began it in 1921. I offered them free
choice: to remain with me or to follow Mr. G. or to leave work
altogether. At the same time, for those who decided to remain
with me introduced a new rule, namely, that they should not
speak about Mr. G. or discuss the causes of the failure of the
work at Fontainebleau. I introduced this rule because I wished to
stop imagination, for since nobody knew anything, all talks on
these subjects would have been pure invention or repetition of
malignant gossiping, which came from Mr. G.'s new people, and
who from my point of view, should not have been admitted in
the work at all. I said that whoever wishes to know anything
about it, he must ask me.
This rule remains and it was never revoked, but people never
properly understood it and made all sort of excuses for
themselves, or even affirmed that this rule was for other people
but not for them. You must understand that all rules are for selfremembering. First, they have a purpose in themselves, and
second they are for self-remembering. There are no rules that are
not for self-remembering, although in themselves

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

they may have a different aim. If there are no rules, there is no
work. If the importance of rules is not understood, the
possibilities of a school disappears. Miss F: Why do you say that it
is worse to talk about the system without mentioning where you
got it from? Mr. Ouspensky: Because speaking about it without
mentioning the source of your information would be stealing. For
instance, you cannot take ideas from a book and not mention the
book. People only do this with my books; they constantly steal
ideas from my books. Mr. M: How long had the Moscow school
existed? Mr. Ouspensky: Several years in Moscow. Mr. M: What
was its size?
Mr. Ouspensky: This is neither here nor there. Before that, it
existed in Central Asia. As for how long it had existed before—
there are reasons to believe that it took this form and was
formulated in this language in the beginning of the nineteenth
century. Mr. M: Does this knowledge claim to have connection
with esoteric knowledge?
Mr. Ouspensky: Obviously, otherwise it would have no meaning.
A school can only start from another school, otherwise it would
be just formatory invention. Mr. M: So it is an unbroken chain?
Mr. Ouspensky: It must be, although you cannot trace it. You can
only trace certain connections by ideas and terminology. This
system came from the East; yet it has European terminology. In
terminology it is connected, evidently through Russian masons of
the eighteenth century with several earlier authors, for instance,
with Dr Fludd.
Miss J: You said you will tell us in what sense we can call this a
school.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

Mr. Ouspensky: I think I have answered it. Only a two-degree school is
reliable. Another school may be a school today and not a school
tomorrow, as it happened with the Moscow school. Also long ago I
explained that organisation which is a school for one person is not a
school for another. Much depends on personal attitude and personal
work. Miss R. If schools are a real living thing, why do they die?
Mr. Ouspensky: What do you mean, saying that schools are living beings?
It is vague and indefinite. But if we take it literally, it will make quite
clear why schools die. All living things die sooner or later. If people die,
schools also must die. It was explained in my lectures that school needs
certain conditions. If these conditions are destroyed, the school is
destroyed. If there was a school in Canton or Wanhsien, it could be
destroyed now and it would cease to exist. Miss R: Ideas may remain?
Mr. Ouspensky: Ideas cannot fly. They need human heads. And school
does not consist of ideas. You forget all the time that school teaches how
to improve our being.
Mr. F: No ideas were written down in the past? Mr. Ouspensky: Maybe,
but ideas can be written down in different forms; they may be written
down so that nobody can read them without explanation from those
who know or without change of being. Take the Gospels—they are
written in different ciphers. One must know the key to decipher them.
Otherwise it would be just a story, doubtful historically and producing
many wrong effects. Mr. F: Will the system give the key to the Gospels?

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

Mr. Ouspensky: Some keys, but you cannot expect all the keys.
Many keys can be got only with the change of being; they cannot
be only matter of knowledge. Again you forget about being.
Change of being means connection with higher centres. Higher
centres can understand many things which ordinary centres cannot
understand.
Mr. F: Is school self-evolving? Mr. Ouspensky: What do you mean
by this? If your question refers to origin of schools, then they are
not self-evolving because one school must always start from
another school.
Mr. F: Can a school reach a higher level than the school it started
from?
Mr. Ouspensky: Yes, if it works according to methods and
principles of school work, it can grow. But you must remember
that the level of the school depends on the level of being of
people who constitute it. Mr. F: You said one can learn how to
escape only from those who have escaped before. Mr. Ouspensky:
Quite right, in the allegory of prison. And this means a school can
start only from another school.
Mrs. D: Would it be possible for everyone in a school to progress
from No. 4 to No. 5, or only for a few? Mr. Ouspensky: There is
no limitation in principle. But you must understand that there is
an enormous difference between No. 4 and No. 5. Man No. 4 is a
man who has acquired a permanent centre of gravity, but in
everything else he is an ordinary man. Man No. 5 is very different.
He already has unity, he has permanent 'I', he has the third state of
consciousness, i.e., self-consciousness. That means he is awake, he
can

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

always when he needs remember himself and higher
emotional centre works in him, and this gives him
many new powers.
Mrs. D: The idea then is to attempt to get to No. 5?
Mr. Ouspensky: First you must think of how to become
man No. 4, otherwise it will be just fantasy.
Mrs. S: Has man No. 4 less 'I's?
Mr. Ouspensky: Maybe he has more, but he has better
control of them.
Mr. A: The chief immediate objectives you recommend are
elimination of emotional life?
Mr. Ouspensky: No, quite different; emotional life
most important. The system speaks of elimination
negative emotions. Negative emotions are an inter
mediate state between sanity and insanity. A man whose centre
of gravity is in negative emotions cannot be called sane and
cannot develop. He must become normal first.
Mr. A: Why I spoke of the elimination of emotion. life was
because you said that all our emotions are potentially negative.
Mr. Ouspensky: Yes, potentially, but it does not mean that they
all become negative. Emotional centre is the most important in
us for our development. There are
many things one can understand only with emotion centre.
Intellectual centre is very limited, it cannot take us very far. The
future belongs to the emotion centre.
But it must be understood that negative emotions are not
really in the emotional centre. They are con-trolled by an
artificial centre, and this is our only chance of getting rid of
them. If their centre was real and not artificial, there would be
no chance of getting
Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

rid of them, because it would mean that they are
useful, or may be useful, in some way. The artificial
centre is created by a long wrong work of the machine.
There is nothing useful about it. Because of this,
negative emotions can be eliminated; they do not serve any
useful purpose.
Mrs. S: So none of us use the emotional centre
rightly?
Mr. Ouspensky Why not?
Mrs. S: You said we have no positive emotions.
Mr. Ouspensky: Positive emotions are quite a different
thing, they belong to higher emotional centre. Man
No. 5 has positive emotions. All our emotions can
become negative, although, as I said, it does not mean
every emotion will become negative. At the same time
our emotions are not reliable so long as there is no
control and so long as we are asleep. But they will
become more and more reliable if we become less
asleep and acquire more control.
Mr. D: Does a school suffer if a member breaks a
rule?
Mr. Ouspensky: It depends how important was the
rule. By breaking a rule he may break the school. Or
the man who conducts the school may close it if
certain rules are broken.
Mr. F: You say that a school which embraces two
degrees is more effective. How can one part of it be
allied to the other?
Mr. Ouspensky: You can only learn this by practice. If
school has two degrees it has much more powers.
from:
Mrs. B: Does this Downloaded
system exist
in www.holybooks.com
other European :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/
countries?
Mr. Ouspensky: I never heard.

Mr. M: Has communal life to do with the organisation of schools?
Mr. Ouspensky: It depends what kind of communal life you mean. For
instance, some time ago in Russia existed so-called Tolstoy Colonies.
Most of them had the same history. People decided to live together,
bought some land and so on, then after the first three days they began to
quarrel and it all came to nothing. Mr. M: I meant a group of people who
live in the same building.
Mr. Ouspensky: It depends first of all on the condition by whom it is
organised. If it is organised by themselves, it generally comes to nothing.
But if a school organises it according to definite principles and with
definite rules—in some cases it may be useful. Miss R: Has the man who
organises a school authority?
Mr. Ouspensky: He has responsibility, so he must have authority.
Miss R: Where does it come from? Mr. Ouspensky: From his knowledge,
from his understanding, from his being.
Question: Not to be able to go on with the system is worse than not to
have started? Mr. Ouspensky: If you have started, nobody can stop you
except yourself.
Mr. M: How to reconcile this with what you have said about there being
no guarantee? Mr. Ouspensky: It depends on your work. How can I
guarantee your work?
Mr. M: But facilities for work would remain? I mean if a person works.
Mr. Ouspensky: Barring catastrophes. We live in in-

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

secure times. About guarantee—what we can get depends on our
own efforts and one must work at one's own risk. But after some
time one begins to see:
'I got this that I did not have before' and 'I got that
that I did not have before.' So little by little one can
be more sure.
Mr. A: I suppose also you can give no guarantee as
to whether people will suffer from some delusion as
regards personal experience? One may take illusion for
fact?
Mr. Ouspensky: Yes, very easy, but if one remembers all
that one was told, one learns to discriminate.

Downloaded from: www.holybooks.com :
http://www.holybooks.com/the-psychology-of-mans-possible-evolution/

